'W: 


iFOR  CONSULT/'  TJON  ONLY 


<§L 


§#«  |p 


J3  A  H  !  T  A  jS  JE  f?  I  £  S-  V 


THE 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA 


TEANBLATBD  INTO  ENGLISH 
BY 

.N.  Chi  la  mb  a  ram  Iyer,  B.  A.;  F.  T.  S, 
FOUNDER 

OF  THE 

Tiruvadi  Jotistantra  Sabha. 


I’iumwd  at  tm  Sooth  Indian  Presj 

Hit 


PREFACE. 


Bharata  Varsha  has  long  continued  to  bo  the  confers  of 
attraction  not  only  in  respect  of  its  wealth  and  civilization 
but  in  that  of  its  intellectual  advancement.  To  it  converged, 
as  to  a  common  focus,  the  eyes  of  foreigners  from  the  earliest 
period  of  tbe  world's  history.  It  was  the  one  fountain  o': 
knowledge  from  which  issued  streams  to  water  distant  lands 
of  ignorance  at  every  point  of  the  compass,  now  yielding 
abundance  of  intellectual  harvest.  Tirno  was  when  Aryan, 
wisdom  shone  resplendent,  and,  from  its  eminence,  dazzled 
the  eyes  of  distant  nations — distant  geographically  and  distant 
chronologically,—  illumined  every  corner  of  the  intellectual 
horizon  and  served  as  a  beacon,  lighting  the  paths  of  erring 
travellers.  History  is  puzzled  in  its  attempt  to  reach  the 
date  of  Aryan  civilization.  Antiquarians  are  at  logger-heads 
in  their  conclusions  touching  the  ago  of  Aryan  learning. 
Though  at  loggerheads  most  of  the  Christian  antiquarians  take 
care  notfco  assign  to  any  Indian  event  dates  earlier  than  what, 
is  permissible  under  their  Biblical  Chronology. 

Now  it  is  well  known  that  Aryan  learning  dates  from  the 
remotest  antiquity.  The  Aryans  have  cultivated  almost  every 
department  of  knowledge.  As  tho  art  of  printing  was  un¬ 
known  a  large  proportion  of  Aryan  literature  has  been  Washed 
into  oblivion  by  the  mighty  wave  of  time.  Not  a  few  remain, 

u  Like  stranded  wrecks  the  tide  returning  hoarse 

To  sweep  them  from  our  sight". 

unless  rescued  from  their  fate.  Our  excellent  Government 
are  now  laudably  working  in  this  direction.  But  most  of  the 
Hindus,  of  the  present  day,  can  neither  use  the  books  them- 


selves  nor  will  they  allow  foreigners  to  interfere  with  their 
sacred  literature.* 


The  public  can  therefore  do  ranch  if  their  eyes  could  only 
be  opened  to  the  importance  of  the  subject.  Most  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  knowing  natives  hardly  know  what  these  books  treat  of. 
I  have  many  a  time  astonished  young  Collegians  and  graduates 
by  quoting  from  Hindu  astronomers  and  mathematicians,  and 
they  were  surprised  to  find  that  the  Aryans  knew  what  the  Eu¬ 
ropeans  know  forgetting  that  these  sciences  were  taken  to  the 
west  from  liere.f 

Now  it  has  como  to  my  knowledge  that  in  many  Hindu 
families  whole  libraries,  for  want  of  inspection,  are  now  being 
feasted  on  by  moths  and  white  ants  and  large  quantities  have 
already  been  emptied  uto  the  dustbins,  the  decay  having 
gone  "too  far  I  know  tint  at  this  moment  over  50  books  are 
being  exposed  to  sun  and  rain  in  a  wollknown  family  here 
Sind  I  hear  they  have  remained  in  that  state  for  over  four 
years.  This  meritorious  act  is  no  doubt  due  to  tho  circum¬ 
stance  that  the  present  owners  of  the  books  have  begun  to 
taste  the  sweets  of  English  education,  while  their  ancestors 
appear  to  have  been  men  of  learning.  Mv  attempts  to  rescue 
thorn  from  further  ruin  proved  a  complete  failure.  The  books 
appear  to  have,  by  a  peculiar  process,  melted  together  and 
formed  into  one  brittle  mass.  Similar  injuries  to  Aryan  lite¬ 
rature  are  more  or  less  going  on  all  over  India.  English  edu¬ 
cation,  like  Aaron’s  rod,  appears  to  have  devoured  up  every 
other  education  and  it  has  spread  now  throughout  tho  land. 


*  And  not  without  reason;  it  may  not  bo  out  of  place  to  quota 
hero  u  little  frou*  Louis  Jacolliot’s  41  Bible  in  India  **: 

i(  The  Keverend  Fathers,  Jesuits,  Franciscans,  Stranger-missions  and 
ether  corporations  uryto  with  touching  harmony  in  India  to  accomplish  a 
work  of  Vandalism,  which  it  is  right  to  denounce  as  well  to  the  learned  world 
as  to  Drier- U  lists.  Ever)  manaflcript,  every  Sanscrit  work  that  falls  tn'.o  their 
hands,  is  immediately  condemned  and  consigned  to  the  dauxes.  Needless  to 
»  iy  that  the  choice  of  these  gentlemen  always  falls  from  preference  upon 
those  of  highest  antiquity,  raid  whose  authenticity  may  appear  incontestable,” 

'  *  *  jft  *  * 

4  Every  now  arrival  receives  a  formal  order,  so  to  dispose  of  all  that  may 
tall  into  hit  hands.  Happily  tho  Brahmins  do  not  open  to  them  tho  secret 
stores  of  their  immense  literary  wealth,  philosophic  and  religious”. 

f  It  may  be  mentioned  hero,  in  passing,  that  those  Sciences,  so  much 
neglected  by  the  State,  stand  a  fair  chance  of  being  revived  as,  at  my  suggea- 
ion  a  Sanskrit  Mathematical  class  has  recently  been  opened  iu  tho  Mahara¬ 
jah's  free  Sanskrit  College ,  Tiravadi,  Tanjoro  District,  and  placed  under  the 
management  of  Brahma  Sreo  Sunueraswara  Srouthy.  Hindu  Astronomer  and 
Almanac  publisher. 


To  the  humble  hope  that  the  progressing  rum  might  ■>.  i  , 
a  measure  retarded,  it  is  proposed  to  tell  the  present  'fndi;;n 
generation,  in  the  language  in  which  they  will  all  and  * 
can  all  hear  that,  if  they  would  e  xert  a  little,  they  might  res  'ho 
from  ruin  a  vast  amount  of  splendid  Aryan  literature:  in  other 
•words,  it  is  proposed  to  publish  an  English  translation  of  Aryan 
Miscellany.  As  the  prosperity  of  a  nation  depends  on  “its 
literature,  the  public  are.  requested  to  form  into  societies  for 
the  collection  and  preservation  of  Aryan  works  and  for  the 
printing  of  the  more  important  of  them.  They  will  also  kindly 
communicate  to  me  the  names  and  particulars  of  Aryan  work's 
falling  within  their  notice. 

The  Samhita  series  is  taken  up  first  as  being  best  calcu¬ 
lated  to  awaken  public  interest  and  arrest  public  attention  oh 
account  of  the  interesting  variety  of  the  subjects  treated  of. 


•Mauuba, 

1st  October  1884. 


jSi,  c. 


CONTENTS 

PAST  I 


CH.  F-VGK.  i 

dir. 

PA  01:1, 

1 .  Introductory 

26.  0  s  Aftbanh  i  Vh)ga 

131 

2.  dy<.m6«hakan 

3 

27.  On  the  winds 

133 

3.  Oil  the  Sau 

12 

28.  On  immediate  ram 

135 

4.  On  the  Moon 

17 ! 

29.  On  fl  ivvers  and  plants 

>— • 

C.O 

X 

s.  On  itahvi 

~  .30.  On  twilight, hours 

14:1 

6.  On  Mii*8 

40' 

*31,  Ou  Digdaha 

14  i 

7.  On  Mercury 

42 

32.  On  E  irth -quakes 

1 19  ' 

8.  On  Jupiter 

45 

33,  On  Udvis  or  Meteors 

m 

9.  Ori  Venus 

56| 

31.  On  Halos 

itfk 

10.  On  Saturn 

63 

35.  On  t ho  Rain- bow 

163. 

11.  On  comets  and  the  like 

66 

36.  On  Gardhavvft  naguraa 

12.  On  Caimpua 

76 

or  cloud  castles 

163 

13.  On  the  Ursa  Major 

37.  On  Parhelion 

164 

14.  On  Karma  Vibhaga 

82  j 

38.  On  DuM-storma 

i  t 

15.  On  the  Nakshatras 

88  j 

39.  On  Than  dor-bolts 

165 

1G‘  On  the  Flatlets 

92 

40.  On  Sftsyn  Jataka  or  vegc- 

17.  On  planetary  conjunc¬ 

table  Horosoopy 

166 

tions 

97 

41.  On  Commodities 

168 

18.  On  the  Moon’s  conjunc- 

42.  On  the  price  of  Commo- 

tion  with  planets 

106 

dhiea 

176 

19,  Ou  Planetary  years 

108 

43.  On  Iudra  Dbwaja  or 

20.  On  Planetary  meetings 

111 

Iudra’s  Banner 

172 

21.  On  the  rain-clouds 

113 

44.  On  the  Lustration  of 

22.  On  Dharana  or  rain  sup 

- 

Arms 

182 

port  days 

120 

!  45.  O 4  u*e  wag-tail 

186 

23.  On  Rain 

121 

46.  On  Portents 

189 

24.  On  Rohini  Yoga 

123 

47.  May  urn  Cliitraka  or 

25.  Ou  Swati  Yoga 

129 

Motoly  M  ^cellany 

202 

PART  II. 


FAGK.  C IT. 


PAGE* 


l. 

On 

Tfafhyasnivnj* 

1 

2. 

On 

Pat  ta  or  crown  pinto 

11 

3 

On 

the  word 

12 

4. 

On 

AngM  vidyn 

16 

5. 

On 

Pimples 

22 

G. 

On 

HoijKo-hniMincy 

25 

7. 

0*1 

1  hitler  an r rents 

43 

US. 

On 

Gardening 

5  9 

9 

On 

.Temples 

74 

10. 

On 

durable  Oomenls 

7? 

1  I. 

On 

Temple  (mages 

7^ 

12. 

On 

Entry  into  the' forest 

86 

13. 

On 

the  fixing  of  (he  ftim- 

gcs  in  Tom  plea 

88 

14. 

On 

the  features  of  Cows  01 

15. 

do 

of  the  D< .g 

03 

V\ 

do 

of  the  Cook 

04 

17. 

do 

of  the  Turtle 

91 

IS. 

do 

of  the  Goat 

95 

2.9- 

do 

of  the  Horae 

96 

20. 

do 

of  Ihe  Elephant) 

97 

21. 

do 

of  Man 

99 

*2 

.  On  the  Five  Mabapnrn 

abas  or  Great  men 

i  15 

23. 

On 

the  features  of  Wo- 

men 

]  21 

24 

,  On  injuries  to  Gar- 

moots 

1 2o 

25. 

On 

Chamnra 

12? 

20. 

On 

i  Umbrellas 

128 

C'f 
>.  1  . 

On  the  praise  of  Womei 

129 

2a 

On 

Amiahiiity 

132 

20. 

On 

VS  per  mafic  dings 

1-4 

3\ 

Do 

P  ;•  i  ume  mu  Lures 

139  { 

31. 

On 

Sexual  rcn'on 

J  54 

32. 

On 

Cots  and  Seats 

160 

38. 

On 

Din  m  ond  a 

164, 

34. 

On 

Pearls 

167 

35. 

On 

-Rubies 

.172 

36. 

On 

Emeralds 

173 

87. 

On 

L <mps 

37* 

33. 

On 

Tooth- brash 

175 

W9. 

Omens — general  (rules 

177 

» •->. 

On 

A  ntataehakrn 

m 

41. 

On 

Ominous  cries 

m 

42 

On 

omens  connected 

with  the  dog 

202 

43. 

do 

the  jackal 

206 

44  • 

do 

wild  animals 

203 

45. 

do 

the  cow 

209 

46. 

do 

the  horse 

210 

47. 

do 

the  elephant 

212 

48. 

On 

o n i  on  a  e  u ©c  ted  w  i  tl 

j  tho 

caw 

!»ng 

of  the  crow 

213 

49. 

Supplementary  to 

omens 

223 

50. 

On 

Effective  periods 

226 

51. 

On 

the  Constellations 

52. 

On 

the  Tibbies  and  Karan  as 

53. 

On 

the  Marriage  Lagna  23  l 

54. 

On 

the  Nukshatras 

205 

55, 

On 

the  Divisions  of  fcho  Zo- 

diac 

238 

56. 

Ora 

Marilgaes 

289 

57. 

On 

the  motions  of  the 

p’a- 

Tittn 

58, 

On 

P  e  Kakrhatra- 

! 

:>u  u  h  \ 

255 

50. 

Con 

elusion 

257 

INTRODUCTION. 


Vakaha  MimrA  was  a  native  of  Avanti  and  the  son  of 
Adifcyadasa  who  was  an  astronomer  and  from  whom  lie  recei¬ 
ved  his  education  as  be  himself  tells  us  in  his  Brihat  Jata- 
ka  (Chap.  XXVI  Verse  5).  The  da*e  of  hia  birth  is  involved 
in  obscmiiy.  If  k  the  practice  of  all  the  Hindu  astronomers  to 
give  this  information  in  their  works  on  astronomy ;  but  unfo’rt a 
nafcely  Yarn  ha  Mi  Lira’s  work  on  astronomy,  known  as  tho  Pan- 
ehasidbanfcika,  is  now  lost*  beyond  all  hope  of  recovery.  The 
popular  notion  is  that  he  was  One  of  fcho  12  gems  of  the  Court 
of  Vikramarka.  Now  Vikrama  Era,  as  wo  find  from  the 
Hindu  calendar,  dates  from  56  B.  C.  whereas  Yaraha  Mihim 
is  considered  to  have  flourished  in  the  sixth  centi  ry  after 
Christ,  So  the  Vikramarka  of  the  first  century  before  Christ 
must  Jbe  different  from  the  Vikramarka  of  tho  6th  century 
after  Christ,  unless  we  go  to  the  length  of  believing  that 
Vikramarka  reigned,  according  to  tho  Hindu  legend,  fora 
thousand  years.  We  are  not  without  parallel  instances  in  tho 
Christian  Bible  in  which  Enos  is  said  to  have  lived  905  years, 
Cuinan  910  years,  Seth  912  years,  Adam  930  years,  Noah  950 
years,  Jarod  962  years  and  Mefchtisala  939  years ;  and  yet 
poor  jnon-biblical  Vikramarka  is  grudged  a  comparatively 
small  matter  of  500  years. 

Now  A,  D ,  50o  is  considered  by  Home  to  bo  the  date  of 
Varahfi,  MihinVs  birth  and  by  others  to  bo  that  of  hi3  Faricha* 
sidhantika,  and  A.  D.  587  is  thought  to  be  the  date  of  his 
death.  It  is  also  said  that  Yaraha  Mihira  has  quoted 
from  Aryabbafcta ;  that  Aryabhatta  was  born  in  476  A.  D, 
and  that  this  circumstance  goes  to  prove  that  tho  dates 
given  above  are  probably  not  incorrect.  We  shall  now  exa¬ 
mine  how  far  these  elates  are  supported  by  evidence  to  be 
obtained  from  Varalia  Mihira's  own  works — a  circumstance 
which,  curiously  enough,  appears  to  have  escaped  tho  atten¬ 
tion  of  even  such  eminent  scholars  as  Colebrook,  Davis,  Sir 
William  Jones  and  others: 


*  Oar  subscribers,  especially  those  of  N.  W.  P.  and  Bengal,  are 
requested  to  give  the  matter  aonio  attention  and  try  if  they  can  procure 
a  copy  of  this  excellent  work. 


<SL 

Vara  ha 

M  ibira  says: — 

rf  At  present  the  Solsticia!  points  coincide  with  the 
beginning  of  Karkataka  (Sign  Cancer) and  with  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  Makara  (Sign  bapricornns).” 

TVs  amounts  to  saying  that  the  Vernal  equinox,  which  is 
midway  between  the  Solstices  (9t>°  from  each),  was  at  the 
commencement  of  Media  (Sign  Aries')  i,  e.  coincided  with  the 
Star  Revati  where  the  fixed  Hindu  Zodiac  commences.  The 
precession  of  the  equinoxes  was  known  to  the  Hindus 
long  before  it  was  known  to  th  •  Europeans,  although  Hindu 
astronomers  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  natnro  of  its  course*— 

Homo  asserting  that  it  oscillates  on  both  sides  of  the  star 
Revati  while  others  that  it  makes  a  complete  revolution  round 
the  heavens,  a  point  about  which  even  European  astronomers 
have  not  arrived  at  any  conclusion.  Now  this  point  is  at 
piesent  abmit  20°  to  the  west  of  the  star  Revati.  Its 
annual  rate  of  motion  is  known  and  the  increment  in  the  rate 
is  also  known  ;  so  that  by  a  process  of  simple  calculation  we 
can  arive  at  the  period  when  the  point  must  h  <ve  coincided 
with  the  star  Revati.  Now  unfortunately,  the  exact  distance 
between  the  Vernal  Equinox  and  the  star  Revati  is  nob  known, 
and  cannot  be  determined  from  observation  as  the  star  (which 
the  Hindu  astronomers  say  was  on  the  ecliptic)  appears  some 
how  to  have  disappeared.  Mr.  Kero  Latclirnana  Chafcrai  M%  A. 
of  Poona  has  adopted  a  star,  known  as  the  Zeeta  Pisciuoi 
(which  however  is  not  on  the  ecliptic)  as  the  Revati  of  the 
Hindus.  According  to  him  the  Ayar>amsatn,  ;the  distance  bet¬ 
ween  the  vernal  .Equinox  and  the  star  Revati),  on  tho  first  Janu¬ 
ary  1883  was  lb°  14 '  20".  According  to  the  late  Mr 
C.  Re ghu n ath achtir iar  of  Madras, (  after  him,  Messrs.  Vencate* 
swara  Deekshitar  and  Sundereswara  JSrouthy  of  Southern 
India)  and  Mr.  Bapu  Deva  Sastry  of  Benares,  the  A  yauamsam 
on  the  1st  January  1883,  was  22°  3d'  39"  and  21°  58'  29" 
respectively*  But  as  these  lengths  have  been  arbitrarily 
assumed  they  may  bo  dismissed  as  deserving  of  no  consider¬ 
ation  in  this  place,  J  have  discovered  it  to  be20e  2P  15"  on 
the  above  date  and  my  discovery  rests  on  the  Drava  Nadi, 
a  work  of  Satyachariar,  a  groat  astronomer.  For  particulars 
of  this  disputed  question  the  reader  is  referred  to  my  article 
on  the  H*iidu  Zodiac  published  in  the  April  (188$)  issueof 
The  Theosopbist, 

Now  we  will  calculate  Varaba  Mihira's  time  from  the 


lengths  of  the  Ayanarasani  as  adopted  by  Mr.  K,  L.  Chafcraiand 
as  discovered  by  me.  The  question  is  one  of  Arithmetical 
progression.  We  will  suppose, 

a=  rate  of  motion  of  Vernal  Equinox  when  it  coincided 
with  the  star  Revati. 

dxs  the  annual  increment  in  tlie  rate. 

/=  the  last  term  or  rate  of  motion  on  the  first  January 
1#8. 

Siss  the  sum  of  the  terms  or  the  length  of  the  Ay&n&xnsftm* 

n  =  number  of  terms  or  number  of  years  required. 

We  have  the  following  series: 

a,  a  +  d,  a  +•  2d,  a  f  8 d} . .  a  f  (n~l )  d. 

is=a*f(u — 1)<2.  /.  a=s/— (n — l)df, 

*=(a  +  Z)”=  1 1 — («— -l) 

2s—(2l+d)n~dn‘i. 
d»*  —  (2i  +  d)«+2a=0. 

U+d±  V(2?  +  d)*— 4.d.  2s. 
w== - - - ti 

where  /=50'".  34. 

00024. 

5=20*  24'  15"  or  18°  14'  20". 

Substituting  these  values,  we  got  n=  14,6 6  and  4,17,368 
years  ,  or  =  1810  and  4,17,528  years,  before  first  January 
1883  where  the  bigger  figures  may  be  rejected  as  ’•bey  refer 
to  the  position  of  the  vernal  Equinox  in  its  second  revolution. 
So  that  Varaha  Mihira's  time  is  found  to  be  either 1882-1 466^ 
416  A.  D. or  1882—13)0=572  A.  D.,  according  to  me  or  Mr. 
K.  L.  Chatrai  respectively.  Now  it  is  true  that  572  A.  D. 
Is  in  support  of  the  supposed  dates,  above  given,  of  Varaha  Mi. 
hira’s  birth  and  death.  But  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  believe 
that  Zeeta  piscium  was  the  Kevati  of  the  Hindus,  for  this  sim¬ 
ple  reason, that  it  is  not  on  the  ecliptic,  Several  st  irs  ■  .  comp  *- 


ratively  less  importance,  stated  by  the  Hindu  astromomerg 
to  bo  cm  the  ecliptic  are  found  to  be  so  when  examined  with 
the  aid  of  modern  astronomical  instruments.  It  is .  therefore 
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  Hindu  /astronomers  could  have 
blundered  in  describing  the  position  of  the  scar  Rovati,  As 
regards  the  difficulty  that  ^aralia  Mihira  has  quoted  from  Arya 
Bkatta — which  quotation  must  be  in  his  Panchasidhantika  now 
lost  — i u  is  not  improbable  that  tho  quotation  is  from  Vrid- 
harya  bliateeam. 

It  may  be  remarked  hero  that  whoa,  in  his  work  on 
Samhita,  Varaha  Mihira  refers  to  the  position  of  the  planets  in 
the  several  signs  of  the  zodiac,  he  refers  to  the  fixed  zodiac 
of  tho  Hindus  commencing  from  the  star  Revati  and  not  to 
the  shitting  zndiac  of  the  western  astronomers  which  always 
commences  at  the  moving  vernal  Equinox. 

The  whole  book  is  one  huge  attempt  to  interpret  the 
language  of  Nature  and  ascertain  its  bearing  on  the  fortunes  of 
men  and  nations.  Where  the  lapidary  discovers 
a  diamond,  the  simple  negro  finds  apiece  of  glass;  where  the 
botanist  discovers  a  snnple  with  valuable  properties  the 
farmer  sees  a  thistle.  Nature  has  been  found  to  speak  in  a 
thousand  ways  at  every  moment  of  time  arid  the  Hindus  from 
the  earliest  times  have  learnt  to  hear  and  understand  her 
language.  This  language,  the  modern  scientific  world,  at 'present 
ignores,  and  with  tiie  simplicity  of  a  negro  or  a  farmer  cau 
even  afford  to  laugh  at  the  supposed  ignorance  of  the  Hindus, 

4  f What  is  truth?  asked  jesting  Pilate,  but  would  not.  wait  for 
nn  answer’ They  have  not  the  patience  to  try  and  see  what 
amount  of  truth  there  is  in  the  Hindu  interpretation  of 
Nature’s  language. 

We  will  take  a  few  instances:  over  1500  years  ago  Yaraha 
Mihira  (who  only  quotes  the  opinion  of  writers  that  wont  before 
him)  said  that  solar  spots  indicate  famine  in  the  land.  This 
was  found  to  be  the  case  during  the  famine  of  1 870—7 7 . 

A  (rain  it  is  generally  kuown  that  all  India  observe  anxi¬ 
ously  the  course  of  the  moon  with  respect  to  the  four  stars  of 
the  !  Ofch  constellation  ( Magha )  when  tho  sun  is  in  the  sign 
Aquarius  i-o  from  about  February  10  to  March  10,  with  a  view 
to  ascertain  the  future  agricultural  prospects  of  the  laud:  the 
market  price  of  food-grains  is  at  once  lowered  or  raised  accor¬ 
ding  as  the  moon’s  course  lies  to  the  south  of  the  four  stars 
ov  more  and  more  to  the  north  oi  the  southernmost  star.  It 


is  also  stated  that  if  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  [north '  6f  all 
the  four  stars  the  world  would  bo  at  an  end. 

Now  astronomers  know  very  well  that  ordinarily  the 
moon  will  never  pass  to  the  north  of  all.  the  four  stars,  I  may 
also  remark  hero  that  in  the  famino  of  1876  — 77  the  moon’s 
course  lay  betvveen  tbo  northern  most  star  and  the  one  next  to 
it.  We  will  cite  one  more  instance, 

Hindu  astronomers  say  that  if  Saturn  should  enter  the 
constellation  of  Rohini  (4th)  the  world  would  bo  at  an  end. 
The  story  is  that  the  astronomers  of  Dasarafcha’s.  court 
announced  to  the  prince  the  dreaded  entry  of  Saturn  into  the 
said  constellation  that  the  prince  at  once  flew  in  the  air  and 
stood  before  Saturn  in  his  orbit  rosolvod  to  stop  his  course  ; 
that  Saturn,  pleased  with  the  prince's  boldness,  promised  nevet 
more  to  enter  the  circle.  Now,  astronomical  calculations 
shew  that  ordinarily  Saturn  will  never  enter  the  said  circle, 
—  a  circumstance  which  shows  that  the  story  is  simply  inten 
ed  to  cover  an  astronomical  truth*  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that ,v 
recently  Saturn  approached  the  circle  to  within  a  degree  fr  om 
it  but  did  not  enter  it. 

In  justice  to  the  wisdom  of  the  ancient  Hindus,  who,  for 
ages,  continued  their  observation  and  tabulation  of  the 
phenomena  of  nature,  the  public  will  do  well  to  give  each  mat¬ 
ter  a  patient  trial  aud  see  what  amount  of  truth  there  is  ia 
each  and  not  follow  the  wisdom  of  Alexander  the  Great  who, 
unable  to  untie  the  Gordian  kuot,  chose  to  cut  it.  Iu  the  course 
of  this  work  the  reader  will  find  that  the  author  refers  to 
several  phenomena  which,  within  the  limited  experience  of  the 
modern  scientific  world  might  appear  improbable.  True 
wisdom  consists  in  patient  investigation  and  not  in  hasty  rejec 
tion. 

It  is  humbly  hoped  that,  if  this  book  wore  carefully  studied 
audits  truths  practically  examined,  the  material  prosperity  ot 
the  world  would  be  vastly  improved- 


N.  0- 


BE  I  HAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


CHAPTER.  I 

Introductory . 

1.  Glory  be  to  the  Sun  who  is  tho  author  and  the  Sou!  of 
the  Universe,  the  ornament  of  the  firmament  and  who  is  enve¬ 
loped  in  a  thousand  rays  of  tho  color  of  molten  gold, 

2.  Having  correctly  examined  the  substance  of  the  volumi 
nous  works  of  the  sa^es  of  the  past,  I  attempt  to  write  a  dec  v 
treatise  neither  too  long  nor  too  short. 

3.  What  means  the  notion  that  the  works  of  the  Rishis  are 
sound  and  not  so  the  works  of  men  ?  Tn  cases  where  the  matter 
refers  to  no  rn  antra,  what  is  there  to  choose  between,  when  tho 
meaning  is  the  same  because  the  words  are  different? 

4.  If  Brahma  has  declared  <(  Kshititanaya  divasa  varo 
nashubhakrit”*  and  mau"Kaja  dinamamshtam^*  what  is  there 
to  choose  between  the  work  of  man  and  that  of  a  Deva? 

5.  Having  examined  the  vast  works  fchao  have  proceeded 
from  writers  from  Brahma  downwards,  I  purpose  to  write  a 
brief  work  embodying  the  substance  of  the  same,  Tho  task 
is  a  pleasing  one  to  me, 

0.  There  was  darkness  (chaos)  in  the  beginning.  Then 
came  water  (into  existence).  On  it  (floated)  a  gold  colored 
egg,  the  (divine)  seed  consisting  of  the  Earth  and  the  Firma¬ 
ment  from  which  there  arose  Brahma,  tho  creative  agent  with 
the  sua  and  moon  for  his  eyes. 

*  Both  the  phrases  mean  that  Tuesday  id  an  inauapicioufl  day  though  ex* 
preasedin  difteronfc  words. 


Bbiuat  Sakhtta. 


[Cf 


7.  ffapila*  says  that  the  Universe  had  its  origin  in  pradha- 
xia;  Kanatdmt  in  drivyat  and  the  like;  a  few  in  kala  (time)J 
otliorslf  in  Svabahava  (catare);  and  some§  in  Karma* 

8.  Enough  of  this  (subject  of  Cosmogony)^  on  account  of 
its  vastness.  If  this  question  wore  discussed,  it  would  swell 
very  much  in  length.  The  subject  I  have  now  to  treat  of  is 
iho  Angavin i schaya  (Sambifca)  section  of  Jotis  Shastra. 

9.  Jotia  Shastra  treats  of  many  different  subjects  and  con* § 
sists  of  three  sections.  The  sages  call  the  whole  by  the  gene- 
rat  name  of  Samhiia.  This  **s0C§5on  which  treats  of  the 
motions  of  the  planets  is  called  the  Tantra  Shastra(Astrenomy), 
.Another  section  is  tho  Horn  Shastra  (Horoscopy).  The  third 
section  is  known  as  the  Angavimsehya  Shastra  (Samhita  or 
natural  astrology). 


10.  In  my  work  on  Astronomy,  I  have  treated  of  the  he- 
iacal  rising*  and  setting  of  the  planets  as  well  as  their  retro¬ 
grade  and  re-retrograde  motions  and  the  like.  In  my  work  on 
Horoscopy  I  have  fully  treated  of  nativity,  of  yatra  and  of 
marriage. 


11.  In  the  present  treatise,  I  have’rejected  questions  and 
re-questions,  historical  narrations,  unimportant  planetary  phe¬ 
nomena  and  all  that  is  useless;  and  1  purpose  to  speak  clearly 
only  of  tho  vital  truths  of  tho  several  subjects  treated  of. 


*  Kapilft  was  tho  author  of  the  sankhya  Philosophy. 

f  Praclhmm  is  a  cl  no  proportion  of  the  throe  guxma  Satwa,  Ihvja  and  Tama. 

t  Kanatha,  ulao  called  Kanatha,  which  term  literally  means  the  a&omgtyer 
*  a  tho  founder  of  the  atomic  theory. 

'V'  Orvya  :  these  are  nine:  earth,  water,  air,  fire,  akas,  Kala  [time]  dik 
^direction],  atrea  ["tho  soul],  and  manas  (the  mind). 

V  A  few:  those  aro  tbo  Pauranikag. 

§  Others:  these  are  the  Loknyatikas. 

$  Some:  these  are  the  Kcemamsakas. 

**  The  Slokafs  evidently  quoted  from  Vaiaha  Mihira’u  work  on  Astro* 
corny,  known  as  the  Puccha  Sidhantika  which  appears  to  have  boon  lost. 


Beihat  Samecita, 


CHAPTER  IT. 

This  Jyotjtxshaka*. 


We  shall  now  proceed  to  given  brief  description  of  (the 
qualifications  of)  a  Jyoutishaka.  He  must  be  of  noble  birth  and 
of  agreeable  appearance;  meek,  truthful  and  without  jealousy  ; 
of  proportional  limbs  ;  of  joints  well  built  and  of  good  growth; 
have  no  physical  defects;  be  of  fine  hands,  feet,  nails,  eyes,  chin, 
teeth,  ear3,  forehead,  eye-brows  and  head  y  d  fine  physique 
and  of  high,  sonorous  voice. 

Generally  speaking  do  not  virtues  and  vices  follow  the 
body? 

The  virtues: — He  must  be  of  cleanly  habits,  able,  noble-mind¬ 
ed,  eloquent  and  of  originality  and  imagination;  must}  posse  ss 
a  knowledge  of  place  and  time;  be  ineok  and  without  uervousnes 
must  be  difficult  of  conquest  by  his  fellow  students;  must  be 
able  and  devoid  of  vices;  must  be  learned  in  matters  of  expiatory 
ceremonies,  of  Hygeine,  of  Occult  Magic  and  of  ablutions; 
must  be  a  worshipper  of  the  Devas  and  an  observer  of  fast  and 
penance;  must  be  of  remarkable  genius  and  capable  of  solving 
any  difficulties  save  in  matters  of  direct  divine  interference,  and 
finally,  he  must  be  learned  iu  astronomy,  natural  astrology 
(Samhita)  and  horoscopy. 

In  Astronomy: — He  roust  have  studied  the  works  of  Pulisa 
Romaka,  v asishta,  JSurya  and  Pitamaha;  he  must  have  a  correct, 
knowledge  of  a  Yuga  (43,20,000  Solar  years),  Varus! nt,  (a  solar 
year),  Ayana  (o  solar  months),  Ttuthu  (2  solar  months),  Maja 
(a  solar  month),  Paksha  (15  solar  days),  Ahorcithra  (a  solar 
clay),  Yama  (one-eighth  of  a  solar  day),  Muhurtha  (one-tbirtieth 
of  a  solar  day),  Nadi  (one-sixtieth  of  a  solar  day  or  24  minutes), 
rinadi[ouG  sixtieth  of  a  Nadi  or  ‘24  seconds).  Prana  (4  seconds) 
Trufi(33,750th  of.  a  Becond)  and  parts  of  a  Trutt  and  other 

*  0c8  who  is  versed  in  Samhita,  Astronomy  and  Horoscope. 


Bbiiiat  Samhita* 


Bbiha?  S&mhita*  [Ch.  2 

•divisions  of  time  and  also  of  divisions  of  space. 

He  must  have  a  clear  knowledge  of  the  Causes  of  Solar, 
Suvana,  *  Siderial  and  Lunar  months  as  well,  as  of  intercalary 
fa  n  a  lion  s  and  intercalary  days. 

He  must  have  a  knowledge  of  tho  beginning  and  end  of 
tSha&htyabda  (a  cycle  ot  60  years),  a  yaga  (5  years),  Vamhn 
(a  year),  Masa  (a  month',  Thina  (a  day)  and  hora  {an  hour) 
and  of  their  lords. 

Be  must  know  the  solar  and  other  divisions  of  time,  their 
similarity  and  dissimilarity  and  must  be  capable  of  propound¬ 
ing  the  fitness  cr  unfitness  of  each  for  particular  purposes  : 
these  divisions  of  time  are,  of  Man,  of  Devas,  of  Jupiter,  of 
Pilhris,  of  Star  (Siderial)  of  the  Sun  (solar),  of  the  Moon 
(lunar V of  the  Earth  (terrestrial),  and  of  Brahma. 

3f  the  methods  of  calculation  given  in  the  five  Astrono¬ 
mical  works  mentioned  above  should  produce  different  results 
he  roust  be  able  to  calculate  correctly  the  places  of  the  sun 
and  planets  by  actual  observation  (by  means  of  shadow  and 
water  level  and  with  the  help  of  Astronomical  instruments) 
of  the  termination  of  their  ay  ana  (northward  and  southward 
coarse,)  of  their  being  due  east,  to  the  observer  after  rising  and 
of  their  altitude  at  any  time. 


J 


He  must  know  the  reason  for  the  correction  required  for 
the  conversion  of  the  heliocentric  into  geocentric  longitude 
and  vice  versa ;  the  causes  of  the  ayana  of  the  sun  and  planets 
and  of  their  slow  and  rapid  movements  at  different  times. 

Ir  solar  and  lunar  eclipses,  be  must  be  able  to  calculate 
the  times  of  the  commencement  and  and  of  the  eclipses,  the 
places  c  f  first  and  last  contact,  the  magnitude  and  duration  of 


*  SOtimee  the  interval  from  sun  rise  to  satirise, 
t  Vide  slokas  23  and  24  Chapter  VIII. 


Bit)] 


Bwhat  Samhita. 


Eclipse;  in  total  eclipses,  he  must  be  able  to  calculate  'Us 
time  between  middle  eclipse  and  the  beginning  or  end  of  total 
phase,  (this  period  being  technically  known  as  Vimarda).  He 
must  also  know  the  color  of  the  eclipsed  lunar  disc.  He  must- 
be  able  to  calculate  before  hand  the  times  of  tho  Moon’s  con¬ 
junction  with  the  planets  as  well  as  of  planetary  conjunctions. 


He  must  know  the  length,  in  yojana  (5  miles),  of  the  daily 
motion  of  each  planet  in  its  orbit  and  of  the  orbit  itself,  and 
generally  the  length,  in  yoiana,  in  every  case. 


He  must  know  the  Earth’s  revolution  round  the  sun  and 
its  rotation  round  its  axis.;  its  shape,  size  and  the  like;  the 
latitude  of  a  place  and  its  complement;  the  nature  of  the  hour 
circle;  the  rhara  dala  ha  la  [the  difference  between  6  hours  and 
half  a  day],  the  times  of  the  rising  of  the  Zodiacal  signs.  He 
must  also  be  able  to  calculate  time  from  shadow  and  shadow 
from  time  and  to  convert  longitude  into  right-  ascension  and 
right  ascension  into  longitude. 

He  must  be  able  to  meet  objections  and  questions  in  clear  and 
distinct  language  and  must  be  capableof  explaining  the  science 
in  its  purity  in  just  the  same  way  as  separating  ibe  pnre  gold 
[from  all  dross]  and  making  it  capable  of  rotainiug  its  value 
when  submitted  to  the  touch  stone,  to  the  fire  and  to  the  hammer* 


How  can  one,  who  is  incapable  of  entrapping  others  with, 
a  hard  question  or  of  answering  any  that  is  put  to  himself  or 
of  explaining  his  views  to  his  students,  expect  to  become  an  as¬ 
tronomer? 

The  fool  whose  exposition  is  at  variance  with  the  text  and 
whose  illustration  is  opposed  to  such  exposition  is  not  unlike 
one  who  addressing  Brahma  as  Parvatti  (Goddess)  begins  his 
praise  by  recounting  the  vices  of  a  prostitute. 

The  predictions  of  odc,  who  knows  astronomy  well,  who  is 
able  to  calculate  the  exact  Lagna  with  such  helps  as  the  sha- 


Imnrt  Samhtta 


'>  water  and  astronomical  instruments  and  who  is  well  ver- 
ed  in  horoscopy  will  never  fail 

Vislmpgupta  says  "flying  with  the  speed  of  the  wind,  ono 
might  find  it  possible  to  cross  to  the  ocean’s  opposite  shore  ;  but 
at  non-Risln  can  never,  even  mentally,  reach  the  opposite  shore 
of  the  vast  ocean  of  jotisbsastra” 

A.ntl  in  hornsocpy  *  the  Jyoufcisbaka  must  know  such  divi¬ 
sions  of  space  as  ran  (a  sign  of  Zodiac  or  a  space  of  30°),  Kora 
(15°  or  half  a  sign) ,  drekkana  (10°  or  one  third  of  a  sign),  tiavam 
3f.ika  (3°20'or  one  ninth  of  a  sign),  dvadasamsakco  (2°  30'  or  one 
twelfth  of  a  sign),  trwsamsLika{V  or  one  thirtieth  of  a  sign), 
and  their  strength  or  weakness  considered  horoscopically ; 
ho  must  know  the  horosoopio  strength  of  the  planets  with 
respect  to  their  dik  +  ('direction),  slam%  (place),  Kala,§ 
[time],  Chishta^  [motions,  conjunctions  and  the  like]. 

He  must  know  the  temperament  of  the  planets  and  the 
parts  of  the  body  lorded  over  by  each;  the  mineral  division 


y  He  vo  follow  a  number  of  technical  terms  which  might  appear  forbid, 
itig  to  persons  not  conversant  with  the  subject. 

f  Mercury  and  Jupiter  hare  dik  bala  when  situated  in  one  of  the  there 
hig ns,  Mesha  (Aries,),  Sitnha  ( Loo,' and  Dhanus  ( Sagittarius ) ,  technically  known 
the  eastern  signs.  The  Sun  and  Mars  have  it  if  in  one  of  the  throo  signs. 
Vmhnbu  [Taurus  j,  Kenya  [Virgo],  Makara capricoruus  known  as  the  South¬ 
ern  Signs.  Saturn  has  it  iu  one  of  the  three  signs,  Milhuna  Tula 

(I /bra)  Kumbha  (Agtwnws)  known  as  the  western  signs.  Venus  and  the  Moon 
have  it  if  in  oneof  the  three  signs,  Kataku  [OancoH  Vrischika  [Scorpio]  an«t 
Meena  (Pi* set)  kuowxi  as  the  northrou  signs 


t  A  planet  has  Rtana  bala  if  he  is  in  his  own  sign,  in  a  friendly  *sigu,  in 
his  acha  sign  or  in  his  own  navamsa  or  drekknna. 


§  The  moon,  Mars  and  Saturn  have  Kulu'  ala  at  night,  Mercury  has  it  at 
ail  times,  the  other  planets  during  the  day,  the  malefic  planet?  in  the  waning 
moon  and  the  benefits  ones  in  the  waring  moon.  A  phuet  has  also  KalabaU 
in  bia  year,  month,  day  aud  hour. 

9 

'l  he  sun  and  moon  have  cheshta  bala  when  in  one  of  the  six  signs  from 
Malara;  the  other  plonats  have  it  when  retrograde,  when  in  conjunction  with 
the  Moon,,  or  when  in  their  greatest  brilliancy.  In  conjunctions  the  northern 
plantti  have  it. 


<SL 


Brihat  Samhita. 

the  caste,  sex  and  authority  of  each  and  the  like; 
be  must  be  able  to  state,  from  tbo  time  of  conception  or  birth 
of  a  person,  particulars  connected  with  these  occasions 
so  as  to  insure  belief ;  ho  must  be  able  to  say  in  whoc  cases  a 
child  will  die  in  infancy,  and  to  calculate  the  period  of  one’s  ex¬ 
istence;  he  must  bo  able  to  divide  one's  life  into  planetary 
divisions  and  subdivides  ;  ho  must  be  able  to  as©  the  ashtaka- 
mrga*  Tables  to  a  given  horoscope.  He  mustknow  bow  t 
the  several  Raya,  Chandra Uvigraha ,  and  Nabhasa  yogas  affect 
the  fortunes  of  men.  Ho  mast  also  know  bow  tb©  fortunes  of 
men  arc  affected  by  the  position  and  look  of  planets.  He  must 
be  able  to  calculate  tbe  cause  of  one's  death  and  discover  his 
future  life. 


He  must  be  able  to  discover  auspicious  periods  for  marriages 
and  the  like. 

In  yatra  X  be  must  know  the  fitness  or  unfitness  of  a  tithi 
[lunar  day],  vara  [week  day],  Karan  a,  N  atchatra,  Ai  uhoortci,  and 
Vxgna  [a  sign  of  zodiac]  and  yoga  for  particular  purposes.  He 
must  be  able  to  interpret  natural  gestures  and  dreams;  §  he 
must  be  able  tp  state  when  a  prince  ought  to  start  lor  battle 
to  secure  succeaa  in  war  ;  he  must  be  learned  in  rules  relating 
to  ablutions  and  sacred  fire  ceremonies  iu  honor  of  the  planets 
and  offerings  to  evil  spirits;  be  must  be  able  to  interpret  pheno¬ 
mena  connected  with  such  sacred  fires  and  with  elephants  and 
horses  while  mounting  the  same. 

He  must  be  able  to  interpret  the  language  and  gestures  of 


*  The  obieotis  to  discover  from  the  positions  of  the  planets  in  ooe  a 
nativety  how  the  planets  affect  one’s  fortunes  as  they  pass  through  tna  several 
zodiacal  signs. 

f  These  nre  particular  positions  of  the  plansts. 

%  This  literacy  means  journey— evidently  royal  marches  and  forms  & 
section  of  horoecopy. 


6  To  ascertain  the  King’*  fortunes  in  war,  the  practice  was  t» direct  the 
milliliter,  the  astrologer  &  the  priest  to  sleep  in  the  Temple  and  then  to  rate?  pre 

their  dreamt*. 


B&1HAT  SaMHITA. 


[gfcttag  men  and  the  like;  he  must  be  learned  in  the  Shadguna* * * § 
and  upay a+  policies;  ho  must  be  stblo  to  predict  the  success  or 
failure  pf  an  undertaking;  lie  must  be  able  to  interpret  omens; 
ho  must  have  a  kno  wledge  of  favourable  baiting  places  for  the 
King'S  army;  he  must  be  able  to  interpret  the  color  *f  cere¬ 
monial  fires;  he  must  know  when  to  employ  the  minister, 
8meS,  messengers  and  forest  men;  he  must  be  able  to  give  di¬ 
rections.  touching  the  capture  of  the  enemy's  fortress. 

On  all  the  above  subjects*  works  of  learned  men  exist. 
The  predict!  vris  of  one  to  whom  the  truths  of  the  science  appear 
as  if  spread  before  his  eyes,  written  on  his  mind  and  planted  in 
his  breast  will  never  fail. 

A  true  Astrologer  is  also  ono  who  has  thoroughly  mastered 
the  Science  of  Samhita. 

It  treats  X  motions  of  the  sun  and  planets;  of  their 

size,  color,  rays,  brilliancy  and  shape  and  changes  in  the  same 
of  their  disappearance  and  reappearance;  of  their  courses  and 
deviations  therefrom;  of  their  retrograde  and  re-retrogrado 
motions;  of  their  conjunction  with  the  stars  and  of  their  places 
among  the  stars  and  the  like. 


It  treats  of  the  effects  of  agastya  chara§  and  mptarishi 
chara  on  particular  parts  of  India,  corresponding  to  parti¬ 
cular  portions  of  the  ecliptic;  of  the  tellar  divisions  oi  every 
substance,  animal  and  plant,  and  of  their  increase  or  decrease 
according  to  the  motion  of  the  planets  among  the  stars;  of 
the  formation  and  interpretation  of  various  figures  presented 


*  These  are  six— 1. Sandhi  ox  reconciliation  with  the  enemy.  2  Vijraha  or 
open  bat  tle.  3  Yana  or  proceeding  to  battle  or  other  strategic  movement 4.  Attmu 
or  stopping  ia  the  capital  5  Voay  idJiam  or  of  two  enemies  to  join  one  with  a 
▼.v-w  to  defeat  the  other  6.  A  fry  a  or  submission .. 

f  These  are  tour  1.  Kama  or  reasoning  with.  2.  Dana  orgift.  3.  Bh^da 

or  bringing  about  dissension  among  the  enemies,  4.  Den  da  or  punishment. 

%  The  following  is  by  no  meana  an  exhaustive  list  of  the  subjects 
treated  of. 

§  Heliacal  vising  of  canopus. 

f  Heliacal  rising  of  the  Bear. 


Bjrihat  Samuita. 


by  the  planets  when  meeting  together;  of  planetary  conjunc¬ 
tions;  <k  planetary  years;  of  monsoonish  indications  of  the 
weather;  of  'the  moon's  conjunction  with  Rohini  (4th  constel¬ 
lation),  sivati  (15th  constellation)  and  the  t/vsr  >  ashidas  (20th 
and  21st  constellations  \  on  particular  weekdays  of  the  month  of 
Ashada  and  of  predicting  the  nature  of  the  coming  weather 
and  crops  from  the  same. 

It  treats  of  the  prediction  of  immediate  rain  from  sur- 
^  rounding  phenomena;  of  judging  the  nature  of  tho  future  crops 
4  .  from  the  growth  of  plants  and  flowers;  of  tho  halos  round  the 
:  sun  and  moon;  of  lines  of  clouds  crossing  the sjIw  discat 
rising*  and  setting;  of  the  winds;  of  meteoric  falls;  of  false  fires; 
of  earthquakes;  of  the  red  sky  immediately  before  sunrise  and 
after  sunset;  of  the  fanciful  shapes  of  clouds  ;  of  dust  storms; 
of  thunderbolts;  of  the  price  of  food  grains;  of  gardening. 

It  treats  of  indradhvaja ,  *  of  the  rainbow  and  of  architect¬ 
ure;  of  the  pred  iction  of  events  from  casual  words  and  ges¬ 
tures  and  from  the  cawing  of  crows;  of  the  formation  of  Zodia¬ 
cal  circles  for  purposes  of  horary  astrology. 


It  treats  of  the  prediction  of  future  events  from  phenomena 
connected  with  the  deer,  tho  dog  and  the  motions  of  the  wind; 
of  the  construction  of  temples,  towers  and  palaces;  of  the  casting 
of  images  aud  of  founding  the  same;  of  tho  growth  of  plants 
and  trees;  of  under  currents;  of  certain  annual  ceremonies  to 
be  performed  by  princes  for  success  in  war. 

It  also  treats  of  the  prediction  of  events  from  the  flight  of  the 
kaivjana(‘d  small  black  bird-the  gracular  religion)  and  from  the 
appearnce  of  various  abnormal  phenomena,  of  expiatory  cerem¬ 
onies;  of  miscellaneous  planetary  nhetiomena;  of  ghrita  kambala;j 
ot  the  royal  sword  ;  of  putt  a;  t  of  the  features  of  a  hou^e 


*  IMns  refers  to  the  erection  of  a  flag  staff  on  occ  as  tine  of  certain  uu* 
nnal  ceremonies  performed  by  princes. 

f.  A  certain  ceremony  of  ablntior.  on  the  occasion  f  a  sovereign';; 
coronation 

A  gold  ornament  for  the  forehead. 


BbI  UT  SiMHITA. 


§L 


1m  h:at  .'Ahhita.  [CeM! 

cock,  a  cow,  a  sheep,  a  horse,  an  elephant,  a  man  and  a  woman. 

If:  also  treats  of  the  treatment  of  women;  of  moles  re  the 
body;  of  injuries  to  shoe  t  and  clothes;  of  hairy  fans;  of  ’  liking1 
sticks*;  ( f  beds  and  seats;  of  lamplight;  of  tooth  brash1  and  the 
like. 


Generally,  the  determination  of  the  fortunes  of.  men  an;t 
princes  depends  on  matters  enumerated  above  and  changing 
every  moment*  lb  therefore  behoves  a  prince  to  employ  as* 
trologers  solely  upon  this  work,  As  it  is  impossible  for  a 
siaglo  astrologer  to  observe  and  determine  all  the  phenomena 
occurring  and  night,  the  task  must  bo  assigned  to 
four  competent  and  well  paid  astrologers;  one  of  them  is  to 
observe  the  east  and  south-east;  another  the  south  and  south¬ 
west;  a  third  the  west  and  north-west;  aud  tho  fourth  the  north 
and  north-east.  For  the  fall  of  meteors  and  the  like  is  sudden 
in  its  nature  aud  the  determination  of  one’s  fortunes  depends 
on  the  shape,  color,  gloss,  size  and  feho  like  of  these  felling 
bodies  and  upon  how  they  approach  or  cross  planets  and  stars. 

And  Bhagavan  Garga  says:~ 

That  prince  meets  with  ruin  who  doea  not  support  a 
Jyontishaka  well  versed  in  all  tho  Divisions  and  Subdivisions 
of  Samhita  and  in  Kotoscopy  and  Astronomy, 

8.  Even  men  who,  having  conquered  thoir  passions 
atidcut  asunder  all  ties  of  Family,  live  in  woods,  desire  to  ques¬ 
tion  a  learned  Jyontishaka  regarding  their  future. 

9.  As  is  the  night  without  a  lamp  and  tho  sky  without  the 
sun,  so  is  a  prince  without  a  Jyoutisbaka,  and  he  gropes  his 
wy  in  tho  dark. 

10.  If  there  were  no  Jyoufcisbakas,  tho  t mhurtas,  tho 
iitheeSf  the  nakshatras,  the  ruthm  and  the  ay  anas  would  go 
wrong. 

11*  It  therefore  behoves  a  prince  who  loves  suce$3s,  fame, 


20,  Only  those  parts  of  the  earth  will  suffer  in  the  corn 
ponding  parts  of  which  on  the  solar  disc  the  spots  happen 
appear. 


21.  If,  when  the  rays  are  turned  away  from  the  earth 
the  color  of  the  sun  bo  that  of  copper  the  commander- in-chief 
dies;  if  it  be  green  or  yellow  the  king's  son  dies;  if  it  be  whitf 
the  royal  chaplain  dies. 

22.  If  the  sun  be  variegated  iti  color  or  of  the  color  oi 
smoke  there  will  be  either  i  mmediate  rain  or  mankind  will 
suffer  from  robbers  and  from  weaponB. 

23  If  in  Sisira  [Februrry,  March]  the  sun  be  of  copper 
color  or  red  black,  if,  in  Vascmta  [April,  May],  blue  crimson 
if,  in  Oreeshma  [June,  July],  slightly  white  and  of  geld  color, 
if,  in  Varsha  [August,  September],  white, 

24.  If,  in  8ar at  [October,  November],  of  the  color  of  the 
centve  of  the  lotus,  if,  in  Hemanta  [December,  January],  of 
blood  color,  mankind  will  be  happy. 

If,  in  Varsha  [August,  September],  the  rays  of  the  sun  be 
soft,  mankind  will  be  happy  even  though  the  sun  should  be  of 
any  of  the  colors  mentioned  above. 

25.  If,  in  Varsha,  when  the  rays  are  sharp,  the  aim  be 
white  then  the  Brahmins,  if  of  blood  color  the  Kshatri%s,  if 
yellow  the  Vaisias,  and  if  black  the  Sudras  will  parish.  If, 
as  said  above,  the  rays  be  soft,  mankind  will  be  happy. 

20,  If,  in  Oreeshma ,  the  sun  be  of  blood  color  mankind  Will 
be  afflicted  with  various  fears; 

Eurt-  .  ^  ™  ^ars^ia*  k0  black  there  will  be  drought  on  the 

If,  in  Hemanta  he  be  yellow  there  will  be  immediate  fear 
from  disease. 

~ / '  1^  ^je  solar  disc  should  be  crossed  by  the  r 

princea  of  the  land  will  be  at  w—  -~K 


Brihat  Samhita. 


31 


[ClT1 


28.  If  in  Varsha  tbe  color  of  tlie  aun  be  that  of  the  flower 


Sireesha  (Mimosa  flexuosa)  fcliero  will  bo  immediate  rain  ;  if 
tbe  color  be  that  of  the  peacock's  plume  there  will  be  no 


rain  for  12  years  to  come. 

29.  If,  then  the  sun  be  black  there  will  be  fear  from  worms 

id  reptiles;  if  it  bo  ashy  pale  there  will  bo  fear  from  foreign 

luces;  if  the  sun  should  appear  with  a  hob  that  prince  will 

pol  ish  iu  th  star*o£  whose  nativty  tho  sun  thou  happens  to  be. 

30,  If  at  other  times  than  rising  or  setting  tbe  aurv  be  of 
the  color  of  the  blood  of  a  hare  there  will  be  war  in  the  land; 
’£  he  should  appear  like  the  moon,  the  reigning  prince  will 
he  killed  and  a  foreign  prince  will  succeed  immediately. 

ftj.  If  the  sun  should  appear  like  a  pot ;  ho  brings  on  hun¬ 
ger  and  death;  if  he  should  appear  broken,  tho  reigning  prince 
dies;  if  without,  rays,  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  fears;  if 
like  a  gate,  then  the  capital  city,  if  like  an  umbrella  then  the 
country,  will  poriali. 

82.  If  the  sun  should  appear  like  a  flag  staff,  or  a  bow,  or 
quivering  or  of  sharp  rays  he  will  bring  ou  wars;  if  there 
should  appear  black  linos  on  his  disc  the  reigning  prince  will 
die  by  the  hand  of  his  own  minister. 

88.  If,  at  rising,  +  the  sun  should  be  crossed  by  tho  fall 
oi  an  aerolite,  or  thunderbolt,  or  by  ligh  tning,  the  reigning 
prince  will  die  and  a  foreign  prince  will  succeed. 

34.  If,  for  several  days,  there  should  appear  a  halo  round 
the  sun  both  at  rising  and  .setting  or  if  the  sun  should,  at  such 
periods,  be  of  blood  color,  the  reigning  sovereign  will  bo  de¬ 
throned  and  a  foreign  prince  will  succeed. 

85,  If  ac  rising  and  setting  the  sun  should  be  hid  by  clouds 
*hape  of  implements  of  war,  he  will  bring  on  strife*,  if 
should  appe  u  like  a  deer,  a  buffalo,  a  bird,  an 


ass  or  a  young 


Biuhat  Samkita, 
camel,  mankind  will  be  afflicted 


with  fears. 


36.  The  planets,  when  subjected  to  the  hot  rays  of  tb  >  sun 
are  freed  from  their  impurities  just  as  gold  is  purified  by  the 
action  of  the  fire. 


37,  If  the  halo  should  be  to  the  north  of  the  sun  there  will 
be  rain;  if  to  the  south  there  will  be  wind;  if  on  both  sides 
(her®  will  be  fear  from  floods;  if  above  the  sun  (towards  the 
meridian)  then  the  king,  if  below  it  (towards  the  horizon),  then 
his  subjects,  Will  perish. 

38.  If  the  sun  should  be  of  blood  color  when  in  mid-heav on, 
or  it  he  should  appear  red  by  a  dust  storm  the  reigning  prince 
will  die. 


$9.  If  tbe  sun  should  be  either  black  or  a  mixture  o(  black 
and  other  colors  and  if  birds  and  animals  should  fearfully  howl 
towards  night-fall,  mankind  will  perish. 

40.  If  the  solar  disc  should  be  of  clear  appearance  ami 
not  irregular  in  shape  and  if  its  rays  be  pure,  wide  and  Ihr- 
reaching  and  if  the  disc  should  be  stainless  manki  nd  will  onj  >y 
prosperity. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

On  the  Moon. 

1.  The  Moon  is  always  below  (nearer  to  the  Earth  than) 
the  sun.  It  is  spherical  in  shape.  One  half  of  it  is  always 
illumined  by  the  light  of  the  sun,  while  the  other  half  is  dark 
owing  to  its  own  shadow,  just  like  a  pot  placed  in  the  sun. 

2.  The  rays  of  the  sun  falling  on  the  watery  moon  i  mov 
the  darkness  of  the  night  (on  Earth)  just  in  tbe  same  wa; 
as  light  reflected  from  a  mirror  (placed  in  the  sun)  remove- 
the  darkness  (from)  within  a  room. 

3.  The  moon  after  quitting  the  place  ''direction 


Bbihat  Sahhita. 


-'StStt  becomes  illumined  by  tho  suu  from  b«low  and 
also  rises  after  the  sun. 


«<8L 

she  then 


4.  Thus  the  lunar  disc  appears  more  and  in  or®  illumined 
<lay  by  day  bv  the  sun  according  to  her  change  of  place, 
just  iii  the  same  way  as  the  western  half  of  a  pot  become* 
gradually  illumined  by  the  suu  in  the  after-noon. 


5.  If  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  soufefy  of  Jeshta  * 
fthe  18th  constellation),  Mulct,  (the  19th  constellation)  and 
the  two  Aahadas  (20th  and  2 1st  constellations)  she  destroys 
seeds,  creatures  in  water  and  forests;  and  there  will  also  bo 
fear  from  fire. 


f,#  If  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  south  of  Vimkha 
(vhe  16th  constellation)  and  Anwratha  (the  17th  constel¬ 
lation)  she  will  bring  on  evil.  If  she  should  pass  through 
tho  middle  of  Mayka  (the  10 1 b  oons telU.fcioa)  or  of  Visakfia 
(the  16th  constellation)  she  wili  bring  on  prosperity. 

,  7.  In  the  six  lunar  mansions  beginning  from  Rovafci  the 

27th)  the  stars  arc  towards  the  east;  and  in  the  twelve  beginning 
from  Ardra  (the  6th)  they  aro  in  the  centre;  and  in  the  nine 
beginning  iromjos/ita  (the  18th)  they  are  iu  the  west  of  the  • 
several  mansions;  and  the  moon's  conjunction  with  the  several 
unar  mansions  is  said  to  take  place  when  the  moou  is  in  the 
middle  of  those  mansions. 


S.  Iff  the  two  horns  of  the  moon  should  appear  but  slight- 
jy  raised  and  far  from  bach  other  presenting  the  appearance  of 
&  boat,  she  brings  trouble  on  tho  sailors  but  prosperity  on  man- 
land  at  large. 

9.  If  tho  northern  horn  of  the  moon  should  bo  higher 


*  'The  Moot*  earn  novel'  pa«-s,  the  ootntnen tutor  adds,  to  the  south  of  the 
foMi  wtara  ipeiitiottod  iu  the  toxu  ordi^txrily  and  that  wherever  tho  phencm^** 
'dejicrtbed  in  the  text  clash  with  astronomical  calculations  they  should  be 
-  ^normal. 

author  now  proceeds  to  state  certaiu  unusual  appearances  of  tbo 


pnJfj-1  Bothat  Samhita.  VS1 

other  by  oue-half,  the  moon  appearing  tike  a  plough* 
plough -men  will  then  sutler.  Thoyanl  their  prince  will  be 
friendly  and  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  Und. 


10,  If  the  southern  horn  should  be  higher  than  the  other 
by  one  half,  the  appearance  of  the  moon  is  also  said  to  be  plough 
like  but  of  evil  consequences.  The  ruler  of  Southern  India 
will  die  and  his  army  will  engage  in  war. 


U.  If*  on  the  first  lunar  day  after  nowmoojr,  both  horns 
should  be  alike  and  of  equal  height,  there  will  be  the  same  pro¬ 
sperity  and  rain  throughout  the  mouth  as  on  such  first  lunar 
day.  If  the  moon  should  appear  like  a  rq$,  the  cattle  will  auffvr 
aud  the  sovereign  will  rule  with  a  severe  rod.. 

'  12.  If  the  moon  should  appear  like  a  bow,  there  '"ill  bo 

war  in  the  land;  and  those  will  succeed  whose  place  *  lie  in  the 
direction  of  the  bow-string*  If  the  moon  should  appear  stret. 
died  from  North  to  South  presenting  the  appearance  of  a  car- 
riage  pole  there  will  be  earthquake  (within  onat  mouth). 

13.  If,  when  the  northern  horn  is  a  little  higher  than  tha 
other  and  bent  aside,  the  southern  horn  is  straight  like  a  carn¬ 
age  pole,  pilgrim  parties  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  no  rain. 

14.  If  one  of  the  horns  should  appear  higher  than  the 
other  and  bent  down  at  the  end,  cows  will  suffer. 

15.  If  tho  horns  should  together  appear  like  a  circle 
then  the  provincial  rulers  will  have  to  quit  their  places5*6. 

16.  If  the  northern  horn  should  bo  higher  than  the  south- 
ern  one  otherwise  than  as  stated  already,  the  crops  will 
flourish  and  there  will  be  good  rain,  if  the  southern  horn 


*  in  ail  tho  above  cases  tho  observation  is  to  bo  made  on  the  brat  oi  feooad 
Jau&r day  and  these  unusual  phenomena  will  produce  svil  only  when  they  clash 
with  tho  calculated  phases  of  the  tnoon  amt  not  otherwise.  Jt  is  thoretora 
tho  dnty  of  almanac  publishers  to  give  beforehand  tho  phases  of  too  moon 
for  tbs  infoimation  of  the  public. 

The  anther  now  proceeds  to  state  certain  ordinary  phenomena. 


r^j0&  bo  similarly  higher  there  will  be  famine  and  fear  m 
the  land. 


•  / 


! 


Bbihat  Samutta. 


[C 


17,  If,  to  any  person  who  observes*  on  the  first  lunar  day 
after  new-  moon,  the  moon  should  appear  of  only  one  horn,  or 
i  £  one  of  the  horns  should  appear  bent  downwards  or  if  she 
appear  like  a  full  moon  (when  in  reality  such  is  not  the  case) 
the  person  dies*. 

1  8.  Having  thus  described  the  shape  of  the  moon  we 
next  proceed  to  describe  her  size  (generally):  if  the  moon 
should  appear  small  there  will  be  famine,  and  if  big,  prosperity, 
in  the  land, 

19.  If  tho  middle  of  the.  moon  should  appear  small,  there 
will  be  hunger  in  the  land  and  princes  will  be  afflicted  with 
cares.  If  the  middle  should  appear  big  she  will  cause  pros, 
perity  and  pleuty.  v 

20.  If  she  should  appear  broad,  she  will  increase  the 
prosperity  of  the  princes;  if  sho  should  appear  big  there  will 

be  happiness  in  tho  land,  and  if  small,  there  will  be  abundance 
-of  that  grain  which  men  liko  most. 

21.  If,  during  the  waxing  moon,  Mars  should  be  eclip¬ 
sed  by  a  horn,  tho  border  (Mlecha)  princes  as  well  as  wicked 
rulers  will  snffer;  if  Saturn  should  be  so  eclipsed  there  will  be 
fear  from  weapons  aud  from  hunger;  if  Mercury  should  be  so 
e  clipsed  there  will  be  drought  and  famine  in  the  land;  if  Jupiter 
should  be  so  eclipsed  eminent  princes  will  suffer;  and  if  Ven  s, 
the  minor  princes  will  suffer.  As  regards  tho  waning  moon 
the  subject  has  been  elsewhere  treated. 

22.  If  Venus  should  be  eclipsed  by  the  lunar  disc  the 
people  of  Magada,  the  Yavatias,  the  Mlechas,  men  of 

*  This  evidently  refers  to  Home  optical  illusion  consequent  on  the  disea¬ 
sed  of  the  eye.  I  know  of  an  old  gentleman  who  for  the  last  ton  months 
©ee*  a  double  nun  anti  a  double  moon.  It  follows  from!  this  that  some  at  least 
of  the  abnormal  appearances  of  the  mm  and  moon  may  not  in  probably  bo.  tho 
rea  alt  of  optical  ill  unions  affecting  mankind  more  or  loss- 


Bju;tat  Samhita. 


*1 


Pulinda  (a  ■  arbarous  tribe),  the  Nepaulees,  tbe  Bhringees, 
and  the  Marwarees,  the  men  of  Cutch  and  of  So  vat,  the  Matfi- 
ras*,  the  Panchalas,  the  Kekayas,  the  Kuluthakas,  the  Can¬ 
nibals  and  the  men  of  Usiuara  (Candabar)  will  suffer  mise¬ 
ries  for  7  months. 

28.  If  Jupiter  should  bo  eclipsed  by  the  lunar  disc  the 
men  of  Caudahair,  of  Souveeraka,f  of  Siudh  and  of  Keera,  (Ca¬ 
shmere)  tbe  rulers  of  the  Dravida  countries  and  Brahmins  as 
well  as  food  grains  and  mountains  will  suffer  for  ton  months ^ 

24.  If  Mars  should  bo  so  eclipsed  the  rulers  of  Tri  garth  r 
(Lahore;  and  of  Uuiwa,  with  their  lighting  men  in  choir  cars, 
the  chiefs  of  Ituliuda,  the  rulers  of  Sibee,  of  Oudh,  of  Kuru 
(Delhi),  of  Mathsia and  of  Sukti  will  suffer  for  six  months. 

25.  If  Saturn  should  be  eclipsed  by  the  lunar  disc,  the 
ministers  of  Youdheya.  the  Kouravas,  tho  A  -junas  as  well  as 
the  men  of  the*  eastern  countries  will  suffer  miseries  for  ten 
months. 


26.  If  Mercury  should  be  so  eclipsed  tho  men  of  Magada, 
of  Muttra  and  those  on  the  banks  of  tho  river  Veena  will  suffor 
miseries  while  the  rest  of  the  laud  will  enjoy  the  happiness 
of  Krith&yuga. 

27.  If  the  moon  should  bo  eclipsed  by  KetbuJ  she  wi’l 
destroy  prosperty,  health  and  plenty.  Artisans  will  perish,  and 
thieves  will  suffer  greatly. 

28.  If  while  the  moon  is  eclipsed,  who  be  crossed  by  tho 
fall  of  a  meteor,  that  prince  will  die  in  the  star  of  whose  na¬ 
tivity  the  moon  then  happens  to  be. 

29.  If  the  lunar  disc  be  of  ashy  color,  of  sharp  raVs 
or  red,  or  rayless,  or  red  black,  or  appear  broken  there  will  be 
fear  of  hunger,  of  war,  of  disease  and  of  robbers. 

30.  If.  the  lunar  disc  should  appear  white  and  of  the  color 
of  the  snow,  of  Kunda,  §  of  Ru  m  ml  a  ||  and  of  crystal 

*  A  country  to  fihe  Nor  Mi  West  of  Hindustan  Propor, 
t  Probably'  Mia  Suirj  inhal  ing  the  Country  on  tho  west  of  tho  Indtt*. 

X  This  gofers  to  tho  lunar  eelijrto  when  the  moon  is  ia  fcuo  descending  no4e-* 

§  A  Spooks  of  whko 
do  do 


Bkihat  SaMHITA* 


jV 

he  brings  prosperity  on  the  land. 


31.  If  the  disc  of  the  raoou  that  regularly  waxes  and 
wanes  should  appear  white  resembling  the  color  of  the  kunda 
flower  Or  that  of  the  stem  of  the  lotus  or  if  the  moon’s  course 
or  disc  or  rays  should  suffer  no  irregular  change  there  will  be 
prosperity  in  the  land. 


32.  During  the  waling  moon  the  Brahmins,  the  Ksha 
trias  and  mankind  at  large  will  prosper;  and  during  the  wa" 
ning  moon  they  will  suffer  miseries.  The  increase  of  pros¬ 
perity  will  commence  after  the  new- moon  and  of  adversity 
after  the  full  moon. 


OHA.PTJBB  V. 

On  Rahc.* 

Some  say  that  Eahut  the  asura,  though  his  head  was  cut, 
dies  not  but  lives  in  the  shape  of  a  planet  having  tasted  of 

ambrosia 

2.  That  he  has  a  disc  like  the  sun  and  moon  and  as  that 
disc  is  black  it  is  invisiblo  when  in  the  sky  except  on  the 
occasion  of  eclipses  in  virtue  of  a  boon  from  Brahma. 

3.  Others  say  that  ho  rosembles  a  serpent  in  shape 
with  his  head  severed  from  his  tail;  a  few  that  he  is  bodiless, 
that  he  is  mere  darkness  and  that  ho  is  the  son  of  Simbika 

4.  Now,  if  he  has  a  body  or  be  simply  a  head  with  a 
regular  motion  in  the  ecliptic,  how  comes  it  that  he  eclipses 
the  sun  and  moon  when  they  are  180°  from  him? 

5.  If  hi3  motion  be  not  subject  to  fixed  laws,  how  comes 
it  that  hts  exact  place  is  ascertained ;  bow  comes  it  that  ho 
never  eclipses  by  the  part  of  his  body  befcweeu  lus  head  an  l 
tail. 

*  The  moon’ i  node,  i-e,  one  of  the  Lwo  point*  where  the  moon’s  or  hi! 
cate  the  ecliptic. 


0.  If  being  of  the  shape  of  a  serpaafc  he  eclipses  with 
his  head  or  with  hia  tail,  how  comes  ifc  that  b.o  does  not  hide 

one  half  of  the  heavens  lying  between  his  head  and  tail. 


7.  If,  as  some  say,  thoro  bo  two  Raima,  when  the  moon 
is  eclipsed  by  one  of  thorn  at  rising  or  setting  how  comes  it  w  © 
seo  the  sun  in  the  opposite  point  aneolipscd  by  the  other  Rahu 
uf  equal  motion  ? 

8-  The  truth  is  that  in  her  own  eclipse,  the  moon  enter# 
the  shadow  of  the  earth,  and  in  that  of  the  sun,  the  solar 
disc.  Hence  the  lunar  eclipse  does  not  commence  at  the 
western  limb  nor  the  solar  at  the  eastern  limb. 

V.  Just  as  the  shadow  of  a  tree  neither  continues  in  the 
same  direction  nor  of  the  same  length,  so  changes  the  shadow 
ox  the  earth,  night  alter  night  owing  to  the  revolution  of  the 
sun* 

10.  When  the  moon,  whose  course  is  always  from  west  to 

©a  t,  is  due  opposite  to  the  aun  swerving  neither  much  to  the  \ 
north  nor  to  the  south,  she  enters  the  shadow  of  the  earth . 

11.  Tho  moon,  moving  from  tho  west,  hides  tho  solar 
disc  from  below  just  like  a  cloud  ;  and  the  solar  eclipse  varies 
differently  in  different  countries  according  to  the  different 
degrees  of  visibility  of  the  eclipsed  disc. 

12.  What  eclipses  the  moon  is  biggar  than  tho  moon  ; 
what  eclipses  the  sun  is  smaller  than  tho  sun.  Hence  in 
semi-lunar  and  semi-solar  eclipses  the  luminous  horns  are 
respectively  blunt  aud sharp. 

IS.  Thus  the  causes  of  the  eclipses  have  been  stated  by 
learned  astronomers ;  that  R  ihu  does  not  cause  tho  eclipses 
is  the  truth  of  tho  shantras. 

14.  “May  you  be  satisfied  oy  tho  gifts  and  fire  offering* 

(of  men)  on  the  occasion  of  the  eclipses”  is  the  boon  be  towed 
on  Rahu  by  the  command  of  JBrakama. 

♦ 


occasion  of  the  eclipses,  Rahu's  presence  is 
ho  is  worshipped;  and  the  moon’s  ascending 
Rahu  and  her  course  (north  or  south)  is  ascer- 
aatronomically  with  respect  to  such  node. 


16.  It  is  impossible  to  dotermine  eclipses  by  other  means 
than  those  described  above  ;  even  on  other  than  now  or  full 
moon  days,  the  luminaries  may  he  eclipsed  abnormally — by 
comets  and  the  like. 


17.  It  is  wrong  to  say  that  there  can  be  no  eclipse  unless 
five  planets  are  in  conjunction  and  it  is  equally  wrong  to 
y  suppose  that  on  the  previous  Ashtamy  (Eighth  lunar)  day  the 
coming  eclipse  and  its  properties  can  he  ascertained  by 
examining  the  appearance  of  a  drop  of  oil  on  the  surface  of 
water. 


18.  The  magnitude  of  the  solar  eclipse  is  determined  by 
means  of  the  moon’s  parallax  (m  latitude);  the  points  (on  the 
disc)  of  the  commencement  and  termination  of  the  eclipse  are 
determined  by  means  of  both  parallax  and  angles*;  the 
times  of  the  commencement  and  termination  of  tho  eclipse  by 
ueans  of  the  time  of  now  moon.  The  details  of  the  process  of 
calculation  are  given  by  mo  in  my  work  on  Astronomy. 

19.  Commencing  from  the  time  of  creation,  Brahma  is 
the  lord  over  the  new  and  full  moon  periods  of  the  first  six 
months;  the  Moon  is  tho  lord  over  those  of  the  second  six 
months;  Indra  over  those  of  the  third  six  mouths;  Kubera 
o^er  those  of  the  fourth  six  months;  Varuna  over  those  of 
the  fifth  six  mouths;  Agui  over  those  of  the  sixth  six  months 
and  \  ama  over  those  of  the  seventh  six  months;  and  so  on— 
the  cycle  being  repeated  over  and  over  again. 

20.  If  Brahma  should  be  lord  as  stated  above,  cows  and 
Brahmins  will  prosper ;  there  will  be  health  and  happiness  ia 


♦  Technically  known  as  Akaha .  alauam  and  Ajm*valaaam. 


Brthat  Samhita. 


and  crops  will  thrive. 

If  the  moon  should  be  the  lord/ the  effects 
described  above;  also,  learned  men  will  suffer  and 
drought. 


21.  If  Indra  should  bo  the  lord,  tlio  princes  will  be  at  war 
with  each  other,  the  crbps  of  Sarat  (October  and  November}, 
will  perish  and  there  will  be  no  prosperity  in  the  land. 

If  Kubera  should  be  tho  lord,  rich  men  will  suffer  in  their 
wealth  but  there  will  be  prosperity  in  tho  laud. 

22.  If  Varuna  should  be  the  lord,  princes  will  Sutter  5 
tho  rest  will  be  happy  and  crops  will  flourish. 

If  Agni  should  be  tho  lord,  there  will  be  good  crops,  and 
there  will  also  bo  health,  freedom  from  fear  and  abundance  oi 


water. 


23.  If  Yatna  should  be  the  lord,  chore  will  be  drought, 
famine,  aud  total  blight  of  crops;  in  the  next  pafva  mankind 
will  be  afflicted  with  misery,  hunger,  death  and  drought. 

24.  If.  the  eclipses  should  occur  before  the  calculated 
times,  there  will  be  miscarriage  of  pregnancy  and  wars  in  the 
land;  if  they  should  occur  after  the  calculated  times,  flowers 
and  fruits  will  perish  and  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land  and 
blight  of  crops.* 

25.  I  have  described,  ab  above,  the  effects  of  the  occur* 
rence  of  eclipses  either  before  or  after  the  calculated  times 
in  accordance  with  the  ancient  shastras;  bat  the  calculation 
of  a  really  learned  Astfonomor  will  at,  no  time  fail. 

26.  If  there  should  be  both  lunar  and  solar  eclipses  in 
one  month.,  +  princes  will  suffer  both  from  dissensions 
among  their  own  army  and  from  wars. 


*Tho  commentator  is  of  opinion  that  these  irregular  phenomena  mhttt  bo 
vtpata  (abnormal,/  in  their  nature. 

f  This  io  taken  to  moan  the  thirteenth  or  intercalary  lunar  month  in  the 
opinion  of  Vyasa  who  ia  hi*  ifahabarat  (BMshma  Parva) refers  to  tho  actual 
occurrence  of  such  eclipses  in  an  intercalary  month  when  dissuading  Doryodo,* 
aa  from  engaging  in  war;  aai  Garga  is  also  of  th*  same  opinion. 


Bkiiut  Sameita. 


[c*: 


IE  the  eclipse  should  occur  at  rising  or  setting,  the  crops 
of  Sarat  (October  and  November)  will  perish  and  princes  will 
suffer.  In  total  eclipses  if  the  eclipsed  sun  or  moon  should 
bo  subject  to  malefic  planetary  influence  there  will  be  death 
and  famine  in  the  laud. 


28.  If  the  sun  and  moon  should  begin  to  be  eclipsed 
when  only  half  risen,  deceitful  men  will  suffer  as  well  as 
sacrificial  rites.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  first 
section*  of  the  firmament,  those  that  live  by  fire  and  virtuous 
Brahmins  will  suffer  as  well  as  men  belonging  to  one  of  the 
holy  orders. 

29.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  second  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  firmament,  ryots,  heretics,  merchants,  the 
Kshatriyas  and  commanders  of  the  army  will  suffer.  If 
when  in  the  third  section,  artisans,  the  Sudras,  tho  Mlechas 
and  ministers  will  suffer. 


80.  If  when  in  mid-beaven,  the  central  provinces  will 
suffer,  but  there  will  be  happiness  over  the  land  au  1  the 
price  of  food  grains  will  fall.  If  when  in  tho  fifth  section, 
herbivorous  animals,  minis'. era  and  home  hold  inmates  will 
suffer  as  also  tho  Vysias. 

31.  If  they  should  bo  eclipsed  when  in  the  sixth  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  firmament,  women  and  the  Sudras  will  suffer ;  if 
when  sotting,  robbers  and  the  border  Mlechas  will  porbh. 
Those  will  be  happy  in  whose  section  the  eclipse  terminates,  t 

32.  If  tbe  sun  and  moon  ohould  be  eclipsed  whoa  ia 
X  their  uttara  ay  ana  (northward  march),  tho  Brahmins  and 

the  Kshtriyas  will  suffer;  if  when  in  their  dalcshina  ay  ana 
(southward  mirch)  tho  Vasias  and  the  Sudras  will  suffer* 
If  the  eclipse  should  commence  at  tho  northern,  eastern. 


*  Oat  of  tho  six  sections  of  the  visible  hemispherical  vault, 
f  Tbe  commentator  adds  that  if  an  eclipse  should  both  oommonce  and 
terminate  in  cno  and  the  same  section  there  will  be  both  suffering  first  and 

happiness  next. 


Bbihat  Samhtta. 


<§t 


/southern,  or  woatom  point  of  the  disc,  tho  Brahmins,  the 
Kftbatriyas,  the  Vysias  or  tho  Sudras  will  suffer  respectively* 
33.  If  the  disc  should  bo  eclipsed  at  one  of  tho  corners,* 
tho  MIochas,  persona  proceeding  to  battle  and  those  who 
live  by  fire  twill  perish;  if  tho  southern  limb  should  be 
eclipsed  aquatic  creatures  as  well  as  elephants  will  die  ;  and 
k  tho  northern  limb  should  bo  eclipsed  cows  will  suffer. 

/  34.  If  the  eastern  limb  should  be  eclipsed  there  wil)  bo 

abundant  rain;  If  the  western  limb  should  bo  eclipsed,  farmers 
and  servants  will  suffer  and  seed  grains  will  bo  destroyed. 


35.  If  tho  sun  and  moon  should  be  eclipsed  wheii  in  the 
sign  of  Aries  (Mosha),  t  the  Panchaks,  the  Kalingas,  §  the 
Surasenas,  the  people  of  Oomboja,  If  of  Odhra  |j  of  Kirata$ 
soldiers  and  persons  who  live  by  fire  will  bo  afflicted  with  mis¬ 
eries. 


36.  If  the  sun  or  mo6n  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  tho^ 
*»ign  of  Taurus  (Vriahabha),  shepherds,  cows,  their  owners 
and  eminent  men  will  suffer  miseries. 


37.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  tho  sign  ot  *■" 
Gemini  (Mithuna),  chaste  women,  princes,  powerful  pot ty 
chiefs,  learned  men,  people  living  on  the  banks  of  tho  Jumna 
and  the  rulers  of  Balhika  and  MaUia with  their  subjects  will 
suffer  miseries. 


88.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  tho  sign  of 
Cancer  (Katnka)  the  Abhooras,  the  Sabams,  *  *  tho  Pulhava  . 


•  N.  K,  S.  B.^3.  W,  or  N.  W.  -  1.  JM '  -  ’ 

f  ©  g.  Smiths,  potters  and  the  like. 
t  Cf  tho  fired  Hindu  Zodino 

§  Kalingn  \  a.  district  on  the  CeromandaJ  coast  extending  from  below  Cuttack 
to  the  vicinity  of  Mndrae. 

f  Camboja  ;  probably  tho  Combodia  of  Cochin  China. 
l|  Odhara  j  the  notbern  part  of  Orissa. 

I  Kiraka  ;  a  degraded  mountain  tribe, 

Sahara*:  a  wild  mountain  tribe. 


[On. 


Brihat  Sameita. 

l^MaUahs,  the  Mafias,  the  Kurus*  the  Sakas,  t  the  Pau- 
ehalas  and  the  Vikalast  will  be  afflicted  with  imsenes  and 
food  graiu3  will  bo  destroyed. 

39,  If  the  sun  and  moon  ahould  be  eclipsed  when  in 
the  sign  of  Leo  (Simha)  hill  men,  prince  like  people  possessed 
of  a  single  military  force,  IT  princes  andforesc  men  will  su  er 
miseries.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  m  tho  sign  of 
Virgo  (Kanya),  crops,  poets,  writers  and  singers  wi  su  or 
and  the  rice  fields  of  Asmaka,  and  Tripura  ||  will  bo  es  loyo 
40  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  the  sign  of 

Libra  'Tula),  the  people  of  the  extreme  border  lands  on  the 

^  the  people  5  sL,  the  trading  classes,  and  the  people 
IZTaTb.  afflicted  .ah  n  wi»  “  *•  7" 

ot  Scorpio  (T riaebika),  tho  people  of  Ud.mbara,  of  of 

Cbolu  .»d  of  Youdheytt  wB  all  »Ser  miser.e.  .long  with 

soldiers  armed 'with  poisoned  weapons. 

41.  If  they  should  be  eclipsed  when  in  tho  sign  of  Sagi  - 
tarus  (Dhauus),  ministers,  fine  horses,  the  \  ulehns^t  o  u  ^ 

tile  Panohalaa,  Phj.ietaa,  «*-»  “ 

the  use  of  destructive  weapons  will  perish  .  . 

sign  of  Capricoraus  ( Makara) ,  fishes,  the  famrhes  of 
the  chandalas,  skilled  magicians  and  physicians  an 
will  perish.  ,  .  - 

42,  n  ,ho,  .hould  bo  eolipaed  when  i«  «» * 

Aquarius  (Kumbha),  bill  men,  men  of  ' 

JU,  robbers,  abepberd,,  _  worth,  «  »>«»  . 

citou.  and  .be  people  of  Barbara  anil  p.mb  ■ 

the  »,ga  of  Pisces  (Meoua),  tb.  prodacte  o.  tboseab- _ 


SC;  ”*»**■•  “■ 

vnded  India. 

Sfer,  SSSSSrsV  of 


5.]  Bkihjlt  Sametta. 

lmd  of  the  sea,  inon  of  respectability,  and  of  learning  and 
persona  that  live  by  water  will  suffer.  * 


<SL 


Also  those  provinces  will  be  affected  which  correspond 
to  particular  lunar  mansions  in  which  the  eclipses  happen  to 
occur,  as  will  bo  explained  in  the  Chapter  (14)  on  KumaivL 
bhaga. 


43.  Solar  and  Lunar  eclipses  are  ot  ten  kinds  and  they 
are  technically  known  as  1  Savya ,  2  Apasavyrt,  3  Tiehuna ,  4 
Gra$ana}  5  Nirodha ,  6  Avamard<xna3  7  Arohct,  S  Agrhata , 
9  Madhyatama ,  10  Tamontya.f 


/  44f  If  the  eclipse  should  commence  on  the  loft  side  of 

the  disc,  it  is  technically  known  as  Savyagrasa;  the  earth 
will  then  be  flood od  with  water  and  fchero  will  bo  joy  and 
freedom  from  fear.  If  it  should  commence  on  the  right  side 
of  the  disc,  it  is  technically  known  as  Apasavyagrasa  :  mam 
kind  will  suffer  from  their  rulers  and  from  robbers. 


v  45.  If  the  solar  or  lunar  disc  should  bo  just  dimmed  by 
darkness  all  round  whieh  disappears  immediately,  the  eclipse 
is  technically  known  as  Lehana  (licking)  G-rasa  ;  all  creature^ 
will  be  happy  and  the  earf h  will  be  flooded  with  water. 

46.  If  a  third,  or  a  fourth,  or  one  half  of  the  disc  should 
v  be  eclipsed,  it  is  technically  known  as  Grrasana  (seizing  with 
the  mouth)  grasa — partial  eclipse  :  the  wealth  of  prosperous 
princes  will  mffer  diminution  and  prosperous  countries  will  bo 
afflicted  with  calamities. 


47.  If  the  eclipse  should,  commencing  at  the  edge,  travel 


•  Such  a  string  of  apparently  incoherent  ideas  might  appear  inexplicabio 
to  persons  ignorant  o’  Astrology  in  which  all  objects,  animate  and  inanimate 
arc  divided  into  plane  ary,  stellar,  zodiacal  arid  other  divisions. 

t  These  terms  are  explained  in  the  subsequent  stanzas;  some  of  them  hava 
to  English  equivalents. 


Beihat  Samhita. 


[C 


_ and  remain  there  for  a  time  of  the  shape  ot  a  dai 

bail,  it  is  technically  known  aa  Nirodha  (blocking  up)  graaa 


SL 


all  creatureat  will  be  happy. 

48.  If  the  eclipse  should  be  a  total  one  and  continue  so 
for  a  time,  it  is  known  as  Avamardana  (tormenting)  gmsa  :  the 
then  chief  provinces  will  suffer  and  the  then  chief  rulers  will 
bo  afflicted  with  miseries. 


40.  If  immediately  after  the  termination  of  the  eclipse, 
the  disc  should  be  re- eclipsed *  *  (by  comets  and  the  like),  it  is 
technically  known  as  Arobana  (climbing)  graaa:  the  princes 
will  be  at  war  and  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land. 

50.  If  a  small  portiou  of  the  disc  should  be  so  slightly 
eclipsed  a»  to  resemble  a  mirror  covered  with  the  vapor  of. 
hot  breath,  the  eclipse  is  known  as  Aghrata  (smelling!  grass : 
there  will  he  good  rain  in  the  land. 

51.  If  the  middle  of  the  eclipsed  disc,  should  be  dark 
while  the  disc  continues  bright  all  round,  the  eclipse  is  known 
as  Jdadhyatama  (centrally  dark)  grasa— annular  eclipse  :  the 
Central  Proviucrat  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries,  mankind  will 
suffer  from  stomach  pain  and  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land. 


52.  It  all  round  the  disc,  the  darkness  bo  thick,  and  in 
the  middle,  it  be  slight,  the  eclipse  is  technically  known  as 
Antyatama  (terminally  dark)  grasa:  the  crops  will  be  injured  $ 
and  mankind  will  suffer  from  robbers. 

53.  IE  the  eclipsed  disc  should  appear  white,  there  will 
bo  prosperity  and  plenty  in  the  land,  but  the  Brahmins  will 
suffer  ;  persons  who  live  by  fire  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 


54  If  )],e  disc  should  appear  yellow,  there  will  be  increase 
of  disease  in  the  land  and  crops  will  suffer.  If  the  disc  should 


*  This.  the  commentator  adds,  most  be  abnormal. 

*  According  to  Marm  the  country  to  the  oast  of  Vinasana  :  (in©  modern 

Fanipttt)  to  the  west  ot  Allahabad,  to  the  north  of  the  Vindya  mountains  and 
to  the  South  of  the  Himalayas.  ,  .  ,  ,  f 

X  Thai©  injoriea,  known  as  Kelt  badha,  are  six  :  excessive  ram,  oroflgbt, 
rat*,  gTaeii  hopper*,  birds,  foreign  invasion. 


color,  swift  footed  animal  a  and 
suffer  and  there  will  be  famino  in  the  land* 


55.  If  the  disc  should  be  of  the  color  of 


<SI. 

the  Mlechas 
the  sky  at 


dawn  of  day,  there  will  be  famine  and  drought  and  birds  v  ’H 
suffer,  if  red-black,  there  will  be  prosperity  and  plenty  .a 
the  land  but  slight  rain. 


56.  If  the  disc  be  of  the  color  of  the  pigeon  or  of  blood 
color  or  of  the  color  of  gold  or  yellow-black,  mankind  will  suffer* 
from  starvation.  T  i:  again  tho  disc  bo  black  or  as  said  above, 
of  the  color  of  tho  pigeon,  the  Sudras  will  suffer  from  disease. 


57.  If  tho  eclipsed  disc  should  appear  yellow  resembling 
fcho  topaz  in  color,  tho  Vysiaa  will  perish  and  there  will  bo 
prosperity  in  the  land.  If  the  disc  should  appear  to  be  bin¬ 
ning,  there  will  be  fear  from  fire;  if  it  should  resemble  gold 
ore,  there  will  bo  wars  in  fcho  land. 


58,  If  the  disc  should  appear  black  resembling  the  color 
of  the  stem  of  durva  grass  (agrostis  linearis)  or  yellow,  there 
will  be  much  death  in  the  land.  If  of  the  color  of  the  Jlowei 
patali  (Bigr^nia  Suaveoleu is)—  trumpet  flower —there  will 
be  fear  froJligbtning. 

59.  If  the  eclipsed  disc  bo  of  the  color  of  red  dusc,  the 
Kshtriyas  will  suffer  and  there  will  he  no  raiu.  If  of  the  color 
of  the  rising  sun,  of  lotus,  of  the  rainbow,  there  will  be  suffer¬ 
ing  from  weapons. 


60.  If  Mercury  should  see  tho  eclipsed  disc,  honey  and 
oil  will  become  scarce;  princes  will  suffer.  If  Mars  should 
see  the  eclipsed  disc  there  wilt  bo  war  in  the  land  and  fear 
from  fire  and  robbers. 


61.  If  Venus  should  see  the  eclipsed  disc,  crops  will  bo 
injured  and  xnankind  will  be  ^variously  afflicted.  If  Saturn 
should  see  it,  there  will  be  drought  and  famine  in  the  land 
and  fear  from  robbers. 


62.  These  evil  effects,  resulting  from  planetary  look  at 


Bkihat  Samhita. 


J§L 


o  eclipsed  disc,  apply  as  well  to  the  time  of  termination  of 
the  eclipse  as  to  its  commencement.  If  Jupitor,  a  beneficent 
planet,  should  also  see  the  eclipsed  disc,  the  evils  described 
will  vanish  in  just  the  same  way  as  the  flame  of  fire  dies  out 
when  water  is  poured  over  it. 

03.  If  during  the  eclipse,  there  should  occur  tempests, 
meteoric  falls,  dust  storms,  earth  quakes,  universal  darkness, 
or  thunder  bolt,  the  eclipse  will  re-occur  after  six,  twelve, 
eighteen,  twenty-four,  thirty,  or  thirty-six  months  respec¬ 
tively. 


64.  If  Mars  should  he  eclipsed  by  Rahu,  *  the  people 
j  of  Avan ti,  those  living  ou  the  banks  of  the  Cavery  and  the 

Nerbada  and  haughty  princes  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 

65.  If  Mercury  should  bo  so  eclipsed,  men  living  between 
the  Ganges  and  the  Jumna,  on  the  banks  of  the  Sarayu  and  in 
the  conntry  of  Nepaul,  those  living  about  the  east  sea  and  on 
the  banks  of  the  Sonne  will  suffer  and  women,  princes,  soldier 
boys  and  men  of  letters  will  perish. 


66  If  Jupiter  should  be  so  eclipsed,  learned  men,  kings 
ministers,  elephants  and  horses  will  perish  and  persons  living 
on  the  banks  of  the  Indus  and  in  the  northern  countries  +  will 
suffer  calamities. 


67.  If  Venus  should  be  so  eclipsed,  the  people  of  Dase- 
raka,  of  Kcknya^of  Yodheya  and  of  Aryavarta  and  the  Sibees 
will  suffer  \  women  and  ministers  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 


68.  If  Saturn  should  be  so  eclipsed,  the  people  of  Mar- 
war,  of  Pushkam  If  and  of  Sourashtara,  the  minerals,  the  low 


*  The  eclipsed  or  eclipsing  lunar  or  solar  disc  as  the  case  may  bo. 

f  Northern  countries  :  a  river,  probably  an  imaginary  geographical  line,  in 
stated  to  ran  from  the  N.  ES.  to  the  8,  W.  of  India  and  countries  to  the  North 
aud  Weft  of  this  line  are  known  as  the  Northern  and  tho  Western  countries 
and  those  to  tbo  Blast  and  South  of  it,  as  the  Eastern  and  the  Southern  coun¬ 
tries. 

^  Pushkara  :  a  celebrated  place  of  pilgrimage  now  called  Pokur  5  miles 
from  the  city  of  Ajmer*. 


Bbiitat  Samhita, 


^tfsses  inhabiting  the  Arbuda  hills,  and  tho  hill  men. 
ta  and  Pariatra  will  perish  immediately. 


60.  If  the  solar  or  lunar  eclipse  should  fall  in  the  lunar 
month  of  Kurtika,  *  persons  who  live  by  fire,  the  Magad&s,  the 
eastern  princes,  the  Kosalas,  +,  the  Kalmashas,  the  Surasonas 
and  the  people  of  Benares  will  suffer  miseries  ;  the  ruler  of 
Kalinga  with  his  ministers  and  servants  and  the  Kshafcriyas  will 
perish  but  there  will  bo  prosperity  and  plenty  in  the  land. 


70*  If  tho  eclipses  should  fall  in  tho  lunar  month  of 
Margasirai,  the  people  of  Cashmere,  of  Oudh  and  of  Pundra  § 
will  suffer  miseries;  quadrupeds  will  perish,  men  of  the  western 
countries  and  Somayajees  If  will  suffer  calamities;  there  will 
be  good  ram  and  prosperity  and  plenty  throughout  the  land. 


71.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  tho  lunar  month  of  Pou- 
eha,$  the  Brahmins  and  the  Kshatriyas  will  suffer;  the  people 
of  Sindh,  the  Kukuras||  and  the  Videhas  will  perish;  there  will 
be  slight  rain  and  fear  of  famine  in  the  land. 


72.  If  tho  eclipses  should  fall  wthin  the  lunar  month  of 
Magha**,  persons  noted  for  filial  duty,  the  descendants  of  Va¬ 
nish  ta,  men  acting  up  to  tho  Vedic  principles,  elephants  and 
horses  will  suffer  distress;  tho  people  ol  Vanga  t+i  of  Anga,  ^ 
and  of  Benares  will  bo  afflicted  with  miseries;  and  there  will  bo 
rain  suited  to  tho  wants  of  the  ryots. 


*  Kartika  :  October«Norombcr,  whon  fcho  full  moon  is  in  tho  aatorism  o £ 
Krifcika. 

f  Kosaia  :  tho  Modern  Oudb. 

X  Margasira  :  Noyerabor-December,  whon  fcho  full  moon  is  in  the  asterifim 
of  Mrigaeeerfiha. 

§  Pundra  i  the  modern  Bengal  and  Bohar. 

8ornayajee« :  those  who  have  tasted  of  fcho  juioe  of  the  soma  plant  in  fcho 
sacrificial  rifce  known  as  Somoyaga 

$  Poosha  ;  Do  comber- January,  when  the  fuU  moon  is  in  fcho  lunar  mansion 
of  Pushyft. 

||  Knknras:  a  branch  of  tho  radayaa. 

**  Magha :  January-February,  whon  tho  full  moon  is  in  the  constellation  of 
Mokha. 

ft  Vauga: East  Bengal. 

^  An^a ;  Bengal  Proper  near  Bhagulptu*. 


eclipses  should  fall  in  the  luuar  month  of 
people  of  Vanga,  of  Astnaka* *  of  Avantika  and 
will  be  afflicted  with  disease;  dancers,  food  crops } 
bow-makers,  the  Kshatriyas  and  ascetics  will 


74.  If  the  eclipses  should  foil  in  the  luuar  month  of  Chaitraf 
painters,  writers,  singers,  prostitutes,  men  learned  in  the  Ve¬ 
das  and  dealers  in  gold, the  people  of  Poundra,  of  Odra,  of  Kek- 
aya  and  of  Asmaka  will  suffer  distress  and  there  will  be  good 
rain  throughout  the  land 4: 

75.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Vai. 
sakha§  cotton,  gingelly  and  beans  will  be  injured ;  the  Iksh* 
wakuSjlf  the  Toudheyas,  the  Sakas  and  the  Kalingas  will  suffer; 
but  there  will  bo  prosperity  over  the  land.$ 

76.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Jye- 
sh!a,||  the  Brahmins,  the  Queens  of  the  reigning  sovereign, 
crops,  ram,  large  gatherings  of  men,  beautiful  persons,  the 
Salpas  and  the  Nisliadas  will  suffer. 

77.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Asha- 
dha**,  weDs,  wet  fields  and  rivers  will  become  dry;  dealers  in 
roots  aud  fruits,  the  people  of  Gandhata,  of  Cashmere,  of  Pa^ 
linda  and  of  China  will  perish;  aud  there  will  bo  abundance  of. 
rain. 


78.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lunar  month  of  Bra. 


*  Phalguna :  February* March,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  asterism  of 
Phalgnni. 

f  Chaitra:  March-  April  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  Constellation  of  Jhi- 
tra. 

J  Immediately  after  the  eclipse,  the  Commentator  adds. 

§  Yaisakha  ;  April* May,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  lunar  mansion  of  Yai- 
sakha. 

*5*  IVshwakas  :  a  warrior  tribe. 

$  To  the  end  of  the  year,  adds  the  Commentator. 

||  Jyoshta  :  May- June,  wbon  the  full  moon  is  in  the  asterism  of  Jyeshta. 

4  Ashadha ;  June- July,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  the  constellation  of  Ashadha* 


Bbihat  Samhita, 


tho  people  o£  Cashmere,  of  Pulinda  and  of  China,  tho 
Yavanas,  the  Kurus,  tlio  Gamlharas  and  the  people  of  Madhya- 
desa  (Central  Provinces),  the  horses  of  Camboja  and  the  crops  of 
Sarat  will  perish ;  the  rest  of  mankind  will  eujoy  prosperity 
end  will  bo  happy. 


79.  If  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  the  lnnar  month  of  Bha- 
drapada  f  tho  people  of  Kalinga,  of  Vanga,  of  Magada  and  of 
Snrat,  the  Mlochas,  tho  Suveoras,  the  Daradas  t  tho  8akas 
will  perish;  pregnant  women  will  miscarry  but  there  will  be 
prosperity  over  the  laud. 


80.  II  the  eclipses  should  fall  in  tho  lunar  month  of  As.,  j  ^ 
wayuju§  the  people  of  Camboja, ofChina,  the  Yavanas,  surgooas> 
the  Balhikas  and  tho  pooplo  living  on  tho  banks  of  the  Indusi 
together  with  the  physioiana  of  Anarfcft  and  of  Poundra  and  tho 
Kirataslf  will  perish,  but  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 


8 1 .  Lunar  and  solar  eclipses  terminate  in  teu  ways  techni¬ 
cally  known  as  1.  dakahina  hanus  2.  vaviu  hanu3  3.  dahslwici  huk • 
$hi,  4©  vama  kukshi,  5.  dakahnia  payu,  G.  vamipayus  7.  aanchar - 
danciy  8.  jarana,  9.  madhyavidarcin(i%  10.  antavidotraiiorfy 

82.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  south 
eastern  point  of  the  disc,  the  termination  is  technically  known 
as  dakshina  hanu  (right  jaw)  :  crops  will  perish;  facial  disease 
will  afflict  mankind;  princes  will  suffer;  and  there  will  be  good 


ram. 


83.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  North 
eastern  point  of  the  disc,  the  termination  is  known  as  vama 


*  Brftvana  :  July-Angupfc  when  the  fuU  moon  id  in  the  constellation  of  Bra- 
vaua. 

f  Bhadrapada :  August-  September,  when  the  fall  moon  is  in  tho  lunar  man¬ 
sion  of  Bhadarapada. 

J  Darada  :  a  country  bordering  on  Cashmere. 

§  A.Bway  oja :  Soptomber-October,  when  the  full  moon  is  in  tho  constellation 
of  Aflwaynk. 

%  Kirataa :  a  barbarous  mountain  tribe. 

$  These  terms  are  explained  in  the  subsequent  stanzas. 


Tianu  (left  jaw):  the  king’s  son  will  oe  afflicted  with  fears ;  there, 
will  ho  facial  disease  and  wars,  but  prosperity  over  tuo  whole 
land. 

84.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  southern 
point  of  tho  disc,  the  termination  is  known  as  Dakshina  KuksUi 
(right  abdomen):  the  king’s  son  will  suffer  and  the  enemies  in 
the  south  may  then  be  defeated  in  wars. 

85.  If  tho  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  northern 
point  of  the  disc,  the  termination  is  technically  known  as  Vama- 
Kukshi  (left  abdomen,)  ;  pregnant  women  will  miscarry  and 
crops  will  suffer  to  somo  extent. 

86.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  terminate  at  the  South 
Western  and  Northwestern  points  of  the  disc,  tho  terminations 
lire  known  as  Dakahina  Payu  (right  anus)  and  Vama  Payu  [left, 
anus]  respectively:  there  will  be  diseases  of  the  genital  organs 
in  tho  case  of  both  terminations,  and  the  Queens  of  reigning 
sovereigns  will  suffer  in  the  case  of  the  latter. 

87.  If  the  lunar  eclipse  should  commence  and  terminate 
at  tho  eastern  point  of  the  disc,*  the  termination  is  known  as 
Saochardnna  (vomifctiug):  there  will  be  prosperity  and  joy  in 
the  land  and  food  crops  will  flourish. 

88.  If  it  should  oommeuco  at  tho  eastern  point  and  termi¬ 
nate  at  the  western  point  of  the  disc,  the  termination  is  known 
as  Jurana  (decaying  ):  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  hunger 
and  with  wars;  where  then  will  they  go  for  protection? 

80.  If  the  middle  of  the  eclipsed  disc  should  first  begin 
to  clear,  the  termination  is  known  as  Madhya  Vidarana  (central 
opening  ):  there  will  be  anger  at  heart  and  prosperity  over  the 
land  but  not  much  rain. 

P0,  If  the  edge  should  first  begin  to  clear  all  round,  while 
there  is  darkness  in  the  centre,  the  termination  is  known  as 

•  Ttiis,  tbt>  Commentator  adds,  mnst  be  utpata  (  abnormal  )  in  its  character* 


Bhihat  Samhita. 


[C£ 


\L 


Vidarana  (terminal  opening):  Madliyadesa  or  Central  Pro- 
vinces  will  suffer,  aud  tho  crops  of  Sarat  will  bo  injured. 


91.  These  termiaations  of  the  lunar  eclipse  apply  to  those 
of  the  solar  eclipse,  the  only  difference  being  that  where  the  bast 
lias  been  referred  to  in  the  former,  it  mast  be  taken  to  mean  the 
West  in  the  latter  * 

92.  If,  within  seven  days  from  the  termination  of  an 
eclipse  there  should  occur  adust  storm,  mankind  will  suffer 
from  starvation ;  if  there  should  occur  a  fall  of  snow  there  ✓ 
will  be  fear  from  disease ;  if  there  should  occur  an  earthquake, 
the  chief  rulers  will  die. 


93.  If,  within  the  said  period,  there  should  occur  any 
meteoric  fall,  the  ministers  will  die ;  if  clouds  of  various  hues 
should  appear,  mankind  will  suffer  from  various  fears ;  if 
clouds  should  begin  to  roar,  there  will  bo  miaoar  riago  of  preg¬ 
nancy  ;  if  lightning  should  appear,  rulers  and  tusked  animals 
will  suffer. 


94.  If,  within  seven  days  from  the  termination  of  an 
eclipse,  there  should  appear  a  halo  round  the  Sun  or  Moon, 
there  will  be  disease  in  the  land;  if  there  should  be  an  appea¬ 
rance  of  false  fire  about  the  horizon  mankind  will  suffer  from 
rulers  and  from  fire;  if  there  should  be  a  storm,  there  will  be 
fear  from  robbers. 


95.  If  there  should  appear  either  a  rainbow,  o;  a  comet 
club-like  in  3hape,  people,  afflicted  with  hungor,  will  suffer 
from  foreign  yoke ;  if  there  should  be  either  planetary  conjunc¬ 
tions  or  cometary  appearances  princes  will  be  at  war  with  one 
another. 

96.  If  there  should  occur  a  fall  of  good  rain  within  tho 
said  period,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  tho  land  and  the  evils 
described  above  will  disappear. 


#  Tho  commentator  adds,  afl  a  corollary  from  tho  abore,  that  stick  direc¬ 
tions  as  S.,  N..  N.  If., and  N.  E.,  in  tho  case  of  the  Lunar  eclipse  sloald  be 
taken  to  men  N.,  S;,  S.  and  8,,  W.,  in  the  casoof  the  solar  och'pae. 


Brihat  Samhita. 


[Ch|S| 


If  ou  the  Dew-moon  day  immediately  succeeding  a 
lunar  eclipse,  there  should  occur  a  solar  eclipse,  there  will  be  dis¬ 
sensions  among  mon  and  discord  between  husbands  and  wives. 

98.  If,  on  the  contrary,  there  should  occur  a  lunar  ec¬ 
lipse  on  tbo  full  moon  day  immediately  succeeding  a  solar  ec¬ 
lipse,  the  Brahmins  will  perform  various  sacrificial  rites  and 


mau kind  will  bo  happy. 


Note  It  may  be  some  relief  to  ihe  monotony  of  what  has 
preceded  to  append  here  a  description  of  certain  ceremonies 
for  the  expiation  of  the  evil  effects  of  the  eclipses. 

Jn  luunr  eclipses  those  persons  will  suffer  in  the  sign  of 
whose  nativity  in  which  tho  Sun  was,  the  moon  happens  to  be 


eclipsed. 


Again,  if  an  eclipse  should  occur  in  the  sign  in  which  the 
Sun  was  in  one’s  nativity,  then  tho  persons  on  his  father’s  side 
will  suffer  ;  if  in  tho  sign  in  which  the  Moon  was  in  one’s  na¬ 
tivity  then  tho  persons  on  his  mother’s  side  will  suffer. 


Again  that  person  will  also  suffer  iu  whose  Lagua*  or 
Naltshatm  tho  sun  or  moon  is  eclipsed. 

If  the  eclipse  should  occur  in  tho  19th  constellation  from 
that  in  which  the  moou  was  in  one’s  nativity  the  person  will 
be  afflicted  with  miseries,  if  he  should  fail  to  perform  the  re¬ 
quisite  expiatory  rites  :  it  therefore  behoves  a  person  to  avert 
the  evil  effects  of  an  eclipse  by  gifts,  by  fire  ceremonies,  by 
the  worship  of  the  Devas,  by  japa  and  by  (eclipse)  ceremoni¬ 


al  ablutions. 


Ho  should  get  a  serpent  made  of  gold  or  flour  and  pre¬ 
sent  it  to  BrshtniuBon  tbeday  of  the  eclipse.  He  shall  then 
recite  the  w rittymjaya  and  other  well  known  mantras.  As 
&U  the  devas  are  present  on  the  occasion  of  an  eclipse,  man- 


*  I.  igua  :  tlpat  particular  sign  of  the  zodiac  which  is  cut  by  the  eastern 
burl/ 0x2  ftt  tho  time  of  one’s  birta. 


iSs  or  japas  ough 
eclipse  progresses 


iglitnob  to  ha  recited  or  performed  while  the 
ses  but  only  wheD  tho  eclipse  begins  to  decline 


Brihat  Samhita. 


<SL 


and  terminate,  though,  during  the  former  period  new  rn  u‘ 
tras  may  bo  learnt.  As  regards  the  ablutions  above  referred 
to,  we  quote  from  Matsyapurana  : 

That  person,  in  tho  lagua  of  whose  nativity  an  eclipse  oc¬ 
curs,  ought  to  bathe  in  the  water  purified  by  ra  antras  and  by 
drugs  as  prescribed  below.  On  the  occasion  of  the  eclipse 
he  shall  adorn  four  Brahmins  with  garlands  of  white  flow  era 
and  with  white  sandal  paste;  he  shall  fix  four  pots  in  f>mr 

places  near,  each  other  and  he  shall  bring  earth  from  places 

frequented  by  elephants,  by  horaos,  by  chariots  and  by  cows 
and  from  ant-hills  and  from  before  tho  entrance  to  the  palaoes 
of  kings  as  well  as  from  deep  waters,  and  throw  the  earth  into 
the  water  pots;  he  ehall  also  put  into  the  water  panchanga - 
vya*,  pearls,  yellow  pigment,  lotus,  the  conch  shell,  a  piece  of 
crystal,  white  sandal  paste,  mustard  soed,  armonnts,  the  frag¬ 
rant  root  of  the  plant  Andropogon  Muricatus  and  the  resin  bde- 
Uuvi  (exudation  of  tho  Amy  Ha  Agallowchum);  he  shall  then 
invoke  the  devas  into  tho  pots.  The  Brahmins  shall  then  aay 


aloud, 


«  May  all  the  seas,  rivers,  and  othor  waters  come  into 
these  pots  for  the  purification  of  our  Master”. 

The  Brahmins  shall  then  invoke,  by  their  respective 
mantras,  the  devas  presiding  over  the  eight  points  of  the 
compass.  They  shall  also  invoke  into  the  pots  the  deities 
presiding  over  all  creatures  and  things,  with  or  without  mo¬ 
tion,  in  the  three  worlds  as  well  as  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  the 
Sun.  They  shall  also  chant  verses  from  the  Rik,  Yajus  and 
Sama  Vedas.  The  pots  also  .shall  hire  thread  8  tied  round 
their  necks  and  adorned  with  white  flowers  and  wh.te  paste. 
The  master  shall  then  bo  bathed  with  the  charmed  waters 


Paueti&gaTyo )  a  mixture  of  the  coVe  mttk,  curd,  butter,  urine  and  dung . 


Bbthat  Samhita. 


bathing  the  master  shall  present  clofeha  and  cows  to 
13rah  thins  and  worship  his  favourite  gods.  At  the  com- 
vnoncena  at  of  the  eclipse  the  Brahmins  shall  tie,  over  the 
master’s  head,  a  cloth  containing  bus  of  the  five  precious 
gems  and  a  gold  plato  with  mantras  inscribed  in  it.  The 
gold  plate  hall  then  be  presented  to  the  Brahmins. 

He  who  bathos  as  prescribed  above  will  not  only  be 
purified  from  the  evil  effects  of  an  eclipse  but  will,  gain  the 

higher  worlds. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

On  Mars. 


1.  The  retrograde  motion  of  Mars  is  of  five  kinds  known 
technically  as  l.ti?fcwa,  2.  asrumukha,  3.  vyala,  4.  lohitanana 
wul  5.  niitrimsa  musala.  * 

2.  If  Mars  should  bogiu  to  retrograde  from  the  7th,  8th 
or  9th  constellation  from  that  in  which  ho^  reappears  t  after 
his  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  such  retrograde  motion  is  techni¬ 
cally  known  us  ushna :  when  Mars  should  reappear  after  his 
next  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  persons  who  live  by  fire  will  bo 
afflicted  with  disease. 

ft.  If  Mars  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  10th, 
lltb,  or  12th  constellation  from  that  of  his  re- appearance, 
finch  retrograde  motion  is  known  as  asrum ukha:  when  Mars 
should  re-appear  after  his  next  conjunction  with  the  Sun, 
juice  will  be  injured  and  there  will  be  disease  and  drought. 

4.  If  he  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  13th  or 

2*Uh  constellation  from  that  of  his  reappearance,  each  retro- 

*  These  term?  are  explained  in  the  a nbsoqaent  stanzas* 

J*  Mars  is  said  to  disappear  who n  within  17  dogrws  fromihe  San  and  to  re¬ 
appear  when  beyond  it. 


£a,  |  h  Bkieut  Samuita. 

£  /  %  /  J 

Sfr^dfl  motion,  is  known  as  vyalci :  when  he  should  diss 
before  his  next  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  wild  boars  and 
animals  will  bo  afflicted  with  distress. 


5.  If  Mars  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  loth 
or  tho  1 6th  constellation  from  that  of  his  reappearance,  such  re¬ 
trograde  motion  is  known  as  rudhiranana, ;  at  the  time  of  such 
reappearance  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  disease  in  tho  taco 
and  with  various  fears,  but  there  will  be  prosperity  m  tho 
land. 


6-  If  be  should  begin  to  retrograde  from  the  17th  or 
the  18th  constellation  from  that  of  his  reappearance  suoh  re¬ 
trograde  motion  is  known  as  Asimu$ala ;  when  Mars  is  in  his 
re-retrograde  motion,  bands  of  robbers  will  be  afflicted  with  dis¬ 
tress  and  there  will  be  drought  and  wars  in  tho  land. 


7.  If  Mars  should  re-appear  in  the  constellation  of  Poor - 

vaphalguni  [sacred  to  Bhaga]  or  in  that  of  Uttaraphalguni 
[sacred  to  Aryama],  retrograde  in  the  constellation  of  Uttara- 
shadha  [sacred  to  Visvedeva],and  disappear  in  tho  constellation 
of  Rohini  [sacred  to  Brahma],  he  will  afflict  the  three  worlds 
with  miseries. 


8  If  Mars,  after  his  re-appearance  in  tho  constellation 
of  Sravana.  should  retrograde  in  that  of  Pnshya,  anointed 
tnonarchs  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries  ;  those  countries  and 
those  persons  will  suffer  in  whose  Naksbatra,  Mars  should 
begin  to  reappear.* 

9.  If  Mara  should  pass  through  the  middle  of  the  cons.  ^ 
teilation  of  Mahha  and  retrograde  back  through  the  same,  - 
the  ruler  of  tho  PaDdia  country  will  perish  and  mankind  wih 
suffer  from  wars  and  drought. 

10.  If  Mars  should,  after  cutting  through  the  constelta-  , 

tion  of  Makha,  approach  th*  middle  of  Viaaktifr  there  will  bp 


•  for  tb.  Kab.Mra  of  *  country  tile.  Chap,  aa  Koorma  Viblmg*. 


Binux  Sawhiti. 


[Ca 


@L' 


line  in  the  land ;  if  he  should  cub  through  the  constellation 
of  liohini,  thore  will  he  fearful  deaths  in  the  land, 

11.  If  Mara  should  pass  to  the  south  of  the  constellation 
of  Rohini,  rulerB  will  suffer,  prions  will  rise  and  there  will  be 
little  rain  ;  if  Macs  should  appear  enveloped  in  smoke  or  witli 
a  pointed  flame,  the  people  o£  Pariyafcra *  *  will  perish* 

12.  If  Mars  should  pass  through  the  constellations*  of 
Rohini,  Sravana,  Moola,  Uttar  a  Ph&lguni,  lrtfcaraohadha,  Ubta*- 
rabhadrapadu  and  Jyeshta,  ho  will  destroy  clouds  charged 
with  rain. 


13.  If  Mars  should  pass  through  fcho  constellations  of 
Sravana,  Makha,  Punarvasu,  Hasta,  Moola,  Poorvabhadrapada 
Asvini,  Visakba  and  Rohini  thero  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land, 

14.  If  Mars  should  appear  with  a  large  and  clear  diso 
or  rad  like  the  flower  of  Kimsuka  (Bufcea  Frondosa)  or  of 
Asoka  (Jonesia  Asoka  Roxb)  or  of  clear  and  fine  rays  or 
like  molten  gold  or  if  he  should  pass  through  the  northern 
path,  t  rulers  will  be  happy  and  there  will  be  prosperity  ia 
the  hind. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
Ok  Mibcpry. 


1.  Mercury  never  reappears  %  after  his  conjunction 
with  the  sun  without  upsetting  the  existing  order  of  things  ; 
he  cauctB  fear  from  flood,  from  fire  and  from  storm*  and  para  . 
lir,es  trade  by  abnormally  enhanciug  or  lowering  tha  price  of 
food  grains. 

1  "  1  "  ■  -  ..  — -  .--.-in-  ,U..-  -  —  -r 

*  Pariyatra ;  tbs  »'eniml  or  the  western  portion  of  tho  Vindhaya  chain 
which  skirts  the  protinco  of  Maltra. 

■  f  Northern  path  :  according  to  Oirga,  ths  nine  comtcllafcuaift  Ciom  Bhataui 
1  ■  1  io  M*kh&  constitute  the  Northern  path ;  the  nine  from  Poor**phalg#aa!  to 
ICoola  constitute  th*?  middle  path  and  the  niuv  from  Poorvashadha  to  Aswini 
^constitute  the  Southern  path. 

%  Mereur  j  disappears  when  within  14  degrees  from  the  Son  and  reappears 
1&7QU&  that  distance;  hoi  when  retrograde,  the  limit  is  only  12  degrees. 


Bbihit  Bamhut, 


5Sl^2.  If  Mercury  should  cut  through  the  constellations'  ci 
ftravana,  Dhaniahata,  Rohini,  Mrigaseersha,  and  Uttarashadha, 
sacred^  respectively  to  Vishnu,  Ashtavasu,  Brahama,  the 
Moon  and  Visvodea,  his  disc  appearing  to  rub  against  those  of 
the  stars,  he  causes  drought  and  disease  in  the  land. 


3.  If  Mercury  should  cut  through  the  five  constellations 
from  Ardra  to  Makha,  mankind  will  suffer  from  wars,  from 
hunger,  from  disease  and  from  drought. 

4.  If  he  should  cut  through  the  six  constellations  from 
Hasta,  his  disc  appearing  to  rub  against  those  of  the  stars, 
cows  will  suffer,  the  price  of  liquid  substances  and  of  juice 
will  rise,  but  there  will  be  abundance  of  food  grains  in  the  land. 


5.  If  he  should  cut  through  the  constellations  of  Utta- 
raptalagum  (sacred  to  Ariyama,  the  Sun),  of  Krifcika  (sacred  to 
Agni,  the  fire),  of  Uttarabbadra  and  of  Bharani (sacred  to  Ye.ma), 
all  living  creatures  will  be  afflicted  with  disease  in  blood,  in 
flesh,  in  bones  and  the  like. 


6.  If  he  should  cut  through  the  constellations  of  Aswi- 
ni  (sacred  to  the  Aswiui  Devas),of  Sataya  (Sacred  to  Varuna), 
of  Moola  and  Revati,  tradesmen,  physicians,  boatmen,  crea¬ 
tures  of  water  and  horses  will  suffer. 


7.  If  he  should  cut  through  one  of  the  constellations  of 
Purvaphalguni  and  PurvashadhaandPurvabhadra  mankind  will 
suffer  from  hunger,  from  wars  and  thieves  and  from  disease. 

8.  In  Parasara'a  work  on  Astronomy,  Mercury  has  seven 
courses  assigned  to  him;  they  are  technically  known  as  1, 
Prekrifca,  2.  Vimisra,  3.  Sumkshipta  4  Teekkshna  5.  Yoganta 
6.  Uhoia,  and  7.  Papakhya. 


9.  If  Mercury  should  pass  through  the  constellations  of 
Svati,  Bharani,  Rohini,  and  Krittika,  sacred  respectively  to 
Vayu,  to  Tama,  to  Pitam&ha  and  to  Agni,  his  courso  is  techni¬ 
cally  known  asPrakrita.  If  he  should  pass  through  the  cocstel  - 
iatious  of  Mrigaseersha,  Ardra,  Makha,  Aalesha,  aaored. 


Bbihat  Samhiu. 


[0 


Sl 


T$3j5ectively,  to  the  Moon,  to  Siva,  to  the  Prifcris  and  to  uio 
serpent,  his  course  is  known  as  Misragati. 

10.  If  Mercury  should  pass  through  the  constellations 
of  Pushya,  Punarrasu  and  tho  two  Phalgums,  his  course  is 
known  as  Sankshipta.  Ifhe  should  pass  th  rough  the  con  at  el* 
lations  of  the  two  Bhadrapaclas,  of  Yisokha,  of  Aswini  and 
of  Kevaii,  his  course  is  knowa  as  Teekshua. 

11.  If  Mercury  should  pass  through  the  constellations  ot 
Moola  and  the  two  Asiiadhas,hiis  course  is  known  as  Yogantika. 


If  such  course  should  lio  through  the  constellations  of  Sra va¬ 
ns,  Chitfcra,  Dkanishfca  and  Satabliisbak,  it  is  known  as  Ghora, 


12.  If  Mercury  should  pass  through  the  constellations 
ofHasfca,  Anuradha,  Jyeahta,  sacred  respectively  to  tho  Sun, 
to  Mifctm  and  to  Indra  his  course  is  known  as  Papa.  We  now 
proceed  to  state  the  periods,  in  d  ays,  of  the  effeots  of  Mercu¬ 
ry  5a  reappearance  in,  ond  course  through,  particular  lunar 
mansions. 


13,  The  eSects  of  the  Prakrits,  and  other  courses  of 
Mercury  described  above,  will  last  respectively  for  40, 30,  22, 
18,  9,  15  and  11  days. 


14.  When  Mercury  is  in  his  Prakrita  course,  there  will 
be  increase  of  health,  of  rain  and  of  crops,  aad  there  will  be 
prosperity  in  the  land.  If  he  should  be  either  in  his  Samk- 
shipta  or  Misra  course  mankind  will  be  partly  happy  and 
partly  miserable.  When  in  his  remaining  four  courses,  Mer¬ 
cury  brings  on  adversity. 


15.  According  to  Deyalsya,  the  effects  of  tho  ruju  (direct) 
the  AHvakra  (over  retrograde),  the  vakra  (retrograde)  and 
the  vilala  (of  irregular  rate),  motions  of  Mercury  will  last  res  * 
pectively  for  30,  24,  12  and  6  days. 

16,  When  Mercury  is  in  his  ruju  course,  mankind  will 
be  happy;  when  in  his  ativakra  course  he  will  destroy  wealth ; 
when  he  is  in  his  vakra  course  there  will  be  wars  in  the  Und; 


7.1  Pkiiiat  Sajchita. 

:  :  V 

when  he  is  in  his  vikala  coarse  mankind  will 
with  fear  and  disease. 


17.  If  Mercury  should,  after  his  conjunction  with  the 
Sun,  reappear  in  the  month  of  Aahadhaor  Svavana  or  V  ye-  kha, 
or  Msgha,  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land  ;  but  if  he  should  be 
in  his  course  in  those  months  there  will  be  happiness  in  the 
laud. 


18.  If  Mercury  should  so  reappear  in  the  month  of 
Kartika  or  Aswayuja,  there  will  be  wars  in  tbo  land,  and  man¬ 
kind  will  suffer  from  robbers,  from  fire,  from  disease  from 
flood  and  from  hunger. 


19.  When  Mercury  should  disappear,  the  chief  towns 
in  tho  land  will  be  besieged  by  enomios,  but  whon  he  reappears 
the  siege  will  be  raised.  According  to  some  writers,  the  latter 
occurs  only  when  Mercury  reappears  as  an  o  voniag  star ;  and 
learned  writers  also  say  that  tho  chief  rulers  will  also  get  an 
accession  of  territories. 

20.  If  Mercury  should  be  of  tho  color  of  gold  or  of  a 
parrot  or  if  it  should  resemble  tho  hue  of  the  Sasyaka*  gem, 
or  if  his  disc  should  appear  glossy  or  bigin  size,  mankind  will 
bo  happy;  but  if  otherwise,  they  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

On  Jui’iteb. 

1.  The  years  of  Jupiter  take  thoir  names  from  the 
several  Nakshatras  in  which  he  reappearsf  after  hia  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  the  Sun ;  and  these  names  are  ideu  tical  with  the 
names!  of  the  lunar  months. 

*  Sasyaka  :  ft  species  of  pi  scions  alone  colored  like  the  inner  fruit  ft  co 
co  v  not ;  perhaps  an  opal. 

f  janitor  disappears  when  within  11  degrees  £tom  tho  Son  and  rcAppoarg 
heyond  that  limit- 


Bbihat  Sakhita, 


These  years  beginning  from  Kartiita  follow,  each 


two  stars  beginning  from  Krittika ;  but  the  fifth,  tne  eleventh 
and  the  twelfth  yoars  follow,  each,  three  Nakshatras.f 


8.  In  the  Karttika  year  of  J u  pi  tor,  cart  drivers,  persons 
that  live  by  fire,  aad  cows  will  bo  afflicted  with  miseries ;  there 
will  be  disease  and  wars  in  the  land ;  flowers  of  blood  and 
cf  yellow  color  will  thrive. 


4.  In  the  Margasira  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be 
drought,  and  crops  will  bo  injured  by  animals,  by  rats,  by 
grass  hoppers  and  by  birds  ;  there  will  be  disease  in  the  land 
and  rulers  will  beat  strife  evon  with  their  friends. 


5.  In  the  Pousha  year  of  Jupiter  mankind  will  be  happy; 
princes  will  cease  their  enmity  to  ono  another;  the  price  of 
food  crops  will  become  cheap  doubly  or  tribly  and  there  will 
bo  an  increase  of  ceremonios  to  secure  special  benefits. *  * 

t>.  In>4he  Magha  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be  an  increase, 
of  mpcct  to  fathers  :  all  creatures  will  be  happy,  health  and 
rain  will  ;  rovail  over  the  land;  the  price  of  food  grains 
will  fall;  and  mankind  will  bo  more  friendly  than  ever. 

7.  In  the  Phalguna  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be  pros, 
pevily  ,  reir,  and  crops,  bore  and  there ;  women  will  suffer 
miseries;  tb  eves  will  become  powerful  and  rulers  tyrannic. 

8,  In  the  Clmitra  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be  slight 


f  Thus,  when  Jupiter  reappears, 

Krithikr.  or  Bohini  bis  yes r  is  known  as 
2.  Ir  Wrigniirshaor  Ardra 

*  *  *  * 

5  In  Poortnphftlgnni  or  TJttamphalguni  or  Hast* 
*  *  *  * 


. Karitika, 

Margasira 

* 

Phalgnn* 

* 


1!  In  8Mab>8hnk  or  PoorvaproshtapuJa  or  Uttaraproshtapadv  .  Proehi*pada 
11.  In  Revati  or  Aawati  or  Bharani  ,  .  ...  Aewaynj* 

*  Such  eeromanice  avo  known  as  PooshUka  Karma,  tho  cor.reJatiVe  of  thia 
baing  Santika  Karma,  which  aim®  at  the  remora!  of  dieting  arils— the  two 
tcpHler  gr>  by  the  name  of  Naimittika  (purpomre)  Karma,  whose  correlative 
ayaiB  >a  Nitya  Karma  i.t.  ceremonies,  the  daily  observance  of  which  is  emio* 
Jtifd  by  the  SkMtra*.  J 


m 

1]  Brihit  Samhita,  \  \GT 

good  food;  and  happiness ;  rulers  will  b^eojne  mild ; 
leguminous  grains  will  increase  and  fair  men  will  sutitat  mise¬ 
ries. 


9.  In  the  Yysakha  month  of  Jupiter  prin  css  with  their 
subjects  will  be  virtuous,  fearloas,  and  happy ;  men  will  engage 
iu  sacrificial  rites  and  there  will  also  ba  growth  of  crops. 

10.  In  the  Jyeshta  year  of  Jupiter  the  chief  men  of  every 
e&ate,  of  every  family,  of  every  opuleut  chmand  of  every  vil¬ 
lage  as  well  as  princes  and  learned  men  will  suffer  miseries;  and 
grains  excepting  Kangu  *  and  prl  grains  will  suffer. 

11.  In  the  Ashadha  year  of  Jupiter  there  will  be  crops 
here  and  there  and  drought  in  other  place*,  mankind  will 
not  be  very  happy;  and  rulers  will  be  afflicted  with  cares, 

12.  In  the  Sravana  year  of  Jupiter  mankind  will  be 
happy  and  crops  will  thrive  and  ripen  well ;  wicked  men  and 
impostors  will  suffer  with  their  followers. 

13.  In  the  Bhadr&pada  year  of  Jupiter  the  produce  of 
creepers  will  thrive  as  well  a*  the  first  crops  ;  but  the  second 
crops  will  fail  and  there  will  be  prosperity  in  some  places  and 
fear  here  and  there. 

14.  In  the  Aswayuja  year  of  Jupiter  the  rainfall  will  be 
incessant ;  mankind  will  be  happy  and  prosperous  ;  all  living 
creatures  will  grow  strong  and  food  supply  will  bo  abundant* 

15.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  northern  path  4 
there  will  be  health  and  happiness  in  the  land ;  wi  ea  he  passes 
through  the  southern  path  the  reverse  of  these  will  be  the 
case ;  and  when  he  passes  through  the  middle  path  there 
will  be  neither  much  of  the  former  nor  nmcb  of  the  latter. 

Ifi.  If,  in  one  year,  Jupiter  should  pass  through  a  space 
of  two  stellar  divisions,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land ; 


•  Kaogn  :  a  kind  of  Panic  soed,  Panioma  ItaHcncn,  never al  varieties  of 
ft h toil  are  cultivated  and  form  articles  of  fool  for  the  poor. 

♦  These  paths  hare  already  been  explained. 


there  will  not.  he  mi 
pass  through  over 
will  be  injured. 


§L 


17  If  the  disc  of  Jupiter  should  appear  of  the  color  of 
fire,  there  will  bo  fear  from  fire;  if  yellow,  there  will  be  disease 
in  the  land;  if  dark-blue,  there  will  be  wars;  if  green,  suffer¬ 
ing  from  thieves,  aud  if  of  blood  color,  suffering  from  weapons, 

13  if  the  disc  of  Jupiter  should  appear  of  the  color  of 
emoke  there  will  bo  drought;  «  it  should  be  visible  dunng 
day,  rulers  will  perish  and  if  it  should  appear  leu-go  and  dear 
at  night,  mankind  will  bo  happy. 

19.  The  Nnkshnfcras,  ltohini  and  Krifctika,  form  the  body 
of  the  Vatsara  Parasha,*  the  two  Ashadhaa  form  his  navel, 
Aynlya  forms  tho  heart  and  Makba,  the  heart-bladder  ;  when 
bencfic  planets  pass  through  these,  there  will  be  happiness  in 

■the  land  ;  if  malefio  planets  should  puss  through  the  body,  there 
will  no  suffering  from  fire  aud  winds;  if  they  should  pase 
ihicugh  the  navel,  there  will  be  suffering  from  starvation;  if 
they  should  pass  through  tho  heart- bladder,  roots  and  fruit* 
will  suffer,  end  if  they  should  pass  through  tho  heart,  crops 
will  perish, 

20.  Multiply  by  11  the  number  of  past  solar  years  from 
the  time  of  the  S&ka  prince  (Salivabana),  and  take  4  times  the 
.product ;  to  it  add  8589,  and  divide  tho  sum  by  8?60. 

21-  Add  the  quotient  to  the  said  number  of  solar  years 
from  the  time  of  tho  Saka  prnice,  and  divide  the  sum  by  60; 
the  remainder  represents  the  number  of  years  by  whioh  Jupiter 
fins  advanced  in  his  cycle  of  60  years  ;  fcall  it  J.);  divide  this 
remainder  by  5,  the  quotient  will  give  the  number  of  yagas 
preceding  the  currents  yoga  of  Jupiter  calculated  from  Vishnu 

«  Vatbstra  Purusha  :  the  12  year*  cycle  of  Jupiter  pertozufce*. 


Bruut  Samhita. 


<8L 


vV  / 

dame  of  the  first  of  Jupitor’s  12  Yugas,  each  consisting 
of  6  years);  and  the  remainder  will  give  the  years  by  which 
Jupiter  has  advanced  in  his  current  Yuga. 

22.  Divide  J  (Jupiter’s  years)  by  !2  and  multiply  the 
remainder  by  O^aud  divide  the  product  by  4 the  quotient* 
will  represent  the  number  of  Nakshatras,  calculated  from 
Dhaniahta,  passed  over  by  Mean  Jupiter  and  the  remainder 
the  number  of  Navamsas  passed  over  by  him  in  the  next  h'ak- 
shatra. 


Note: — We  will  now  explain  the  principles  iuvolved  iu 
the  calculations  contained  iu  the  three  preceding  stands  : 
A  kalpa  contains  1000,  Chatur  Yugas;ina  kalpa.  according 
to  Ariyabhatla  the  number  of  siderial  revolutions  or  years  of 
the  Sun  is  4,82,00,00,000;  and  the  number  of  nrlerial  revolu. 
tions  of  Jupiter  is  361224000;  but  as  each  revolution  contains 
12  years,  tlio  number  of  Jupitor’s  years  in  the  same  period 
is  4  37,06  88,000,  in  other  wards,  iu  a  Chatur  yuga. 

No.  of  Solar  \  .  No.  ol  Jupiter’s  1  .  .^20,000:13,70688 
years  S  yours  J  s :  V875  :  1897 

or  : :  3750  :  3794,  to  suit 
ourselves  to  the  figures  in  th®  text.  So  that  for  every  3,750 
solar  years  we  getS, 750+  44  years  of  Jupiter  ;  therefore  a  sotar 

year=l  +*-f£7  year3  o£  JuPiier- 

We  .will  now  find  cut  the  number  of  years  by  which  Jupi¬ 
ter  had  advanced  in  the  Kaliyug  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Saka  era,  it  beiDg  known  that  the  number  of  solar  years  during 
the  said  period  is  3179.  We  have  th®  following  proportion, 
3750  :  3704  : :  8179:  x,  years  of  Jupiter  require-!. 

*  =  3704  x  31 79  f>216U?  A  the  number  of  years  of 

3750 

Jupiter  from  the  commencement  of  the  Kaliyug  to  the  com- 
men.ement  of  the  Saka  era. 

Now  it  is  known  that  Kaliyug.i  commenced  in  the  year 


Bkjhat  Samhita. 


4il 


^ •*i^]aya.  (th6  27th  year  from  Prabhava,  which  is  the  first  year 
in  a  cycle  of  63  years  of  Jupiter). 

Therefore  82Mff£$  ~b  26  or  3242j^|$$,  being  divided 
by  60,  the  vemiiinder  will  give  the  particular  year  of  Jupiter 
(in  bis  cycle  o f  60  years)  from  Prabbava  at  the  time  of  the 
commencement  of  the  Siki  er.t  and  this  remainder  is 
2J |l!>-  which  is  the  3rd  year  or  the  year  Sukla  of  the  cycle. 
Now  2pa  m  ff& 

Coming  down  to  the  poriod  subsequent  to  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  S&ka  era  wo  have,  as  already  stated, 

1  ^  rfibr  :  *•  No.  of  past  Solar  years :  x,  No ,  of  past  J npiter'a 
years. 

x  =  No.  of  past  \  ,  44  X^No.  of  past  Solar  years 
Solar  years  J  **  tt750* 

Adding  to  this  tho  2^4-$-$  or  $-§-$-£  years  which  elapsed 
from  the  beginning  of  Prabh&va  to  tho  time  of  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  Suka  era  we  get, 

1  4*  44  x  ^Q*  °f  past  Solar  years 


No.  of  past 
Sbl&r  years 


£626 


3750 


.  No  of  past  ^  44  x  No  of  past  Solar  years  -+- 
Solar  years  J  ~  §750 


3750 

8626 


when  this  is  divided  by  60  the  remainder  will  give  the  year 
of  Jupiter  in  his  cycle  of  60  years  commencing  from  Prabha- 
va  ;  call  this  remainder  J, 


Now  as  there  aro  12  yugas  (each  of  5  years)  hr  a  cycle 
of  60  years  J,  bring  divided  by  5,  tho  quotient  will  give  tho 
mimic i  ofyugas  that  have  elapsed  from  the  first  yugi  of 
Vishnu  and  the  remainder  the  number  of  years  by  which 
Jupiter  h as  advanced  in  the  current  ynga.  (For  tho  names 
of  these  yagas  viie  stanza  23), 

This  brings  us  to  the  end  of  Stanza  21.  Stanza  22  aims 
at  discovering  the  particular  lunar  mansion  or  Ns  kshatra  in 
which  Jupiter  might  happen  to  be  at  any  given  time  ;  Time 


»/8,1  BKIHA7  Samsita.  NHI  , 

i/  KJM^i 

token  by  Mean  Jupiter  to  go  over  a  sign  of  Zodiac  is  called 
a  year  of  Jupiter. 


Therefore  a  number  of  such  years  will  represent  th'©-  nuiu  -er 
of  signs  gone  over  by  Mean  Jupiter  during  tho  titne.  It'  1  - 
such  yo.«  rs  Mean  J  n  pi  ter  makes  a  circuit)  of  the  heave  ns.  N'  \ 
thu  year  Prabhava.  commences  when  Jupiter  on  tor  a  (oi  re¬ 
appears  according  to  commentator)  m  tho  constellation  of 
D'hanishta  in  the  month  of  Maghiij  and  Mean  Jupiter  takes 
'12  years  from  Dhaiushta  to  it  again.  If  therefore  J  were 
divided  by  12,  the  remainder  will  show  tho  number  of  y  -ats 
taken  by  Mean  Jupiter  to  go  over  the  number  of  lunar  mansions 
lying  between  Dhanishta  and  the  particular  lunar  mansion 
a,  which  Jupiter  might  happen  to  be  at  the  given  time.  Call 
this  remainder  B.  As  stated  above,  R,  which  represents  tho 
number  of  years,  also  represents  the  number  oi  Zodiacal 
signs.  Now  as  each  sign  contains  2{  lunar  mansions  the 
number  of  lunar  mansions  required  (from  Dhanishta) ;=  2$  >  it 
—  ,t  jj.  This  brings  ns  to  the  end  of  .Stanza  22, 


It  will  be  observed  from  the  above  that  the  figure  givon 


in  *-aoza  20  is  8589  and  not  8626.  The  fact  is  that  in  our 

process  we  adopted  Aryabhatca’s  figure,  there  being  a  differ¬ 
ence  of  opinion  among  Hindu  Astronomers  regarding  the 
number  of  thesiderial  revolutions  of  Jupiter  m  a  kalpa.  For 
instance:  Baskaracharriar  gives  it  as  361  226  4o5  against 
36 1  224  000  of  Aryabhatta.  But  what  we  want  is  Varaha  Mibi. 
ia’s  figure.  As  bis  Astronomical  work,  Panchasindlmmik  i,  is 
now  lost  we  cannot  give  it  exactly;  but  calculating  backwards 
from  the  figure  85t>9  appearing  in  the  text,  we  find  the  num¬ 
ber  of  siderial  revolutions  of  Jupiter,  according  to  Varaha 
Mihira  to  be  364  ISO  000.  This  is  probably  the  correct  figure. 


23,  The  twelve  yugas  of  Jupiter’s  cycle  are  known  as 
belonging  to  the  Devas  1.  Vishnu,  2.  Jupiter,  3.  Lndra ,  4* 
Jtgtii  (fire),  5.  Ivashta ,  6.  Ahirhvdhntja,  7.  The  i'n'rtV,  8,  Vm u- 


Bbihat  Samhita. 


< leva ,  0.  Soma  (the  moon),  1 0.  thdragni ,  1 1 .  Asvinidf  va t  1 2. 
Bhaga. 


24.  The  five  years  of  each  yuga  are  known  as  1.  Sam- 
vats-ira,  2.  Parivalsara,  3.  Idavatsom .,  4.  Anuvaisam,  5. 
Idvatsara,  These  are  sacred  respectively  to  1 .  Agn%  (fire), 
2.  Arka  (ibe  Sun),  3.  Chandra  (the  .Moon),  4.  Prajapati  (the 
Creator),  5.  Rtidra  (the  Destroyer). 


25.  Generally  in  every  yuga,  there  will  be  gold  rain  in 
the  first  year  *  and  at  the  beginning  +  of  the  second  year  ; 
■excessive  rain  in  the  third  year;  moderate  rain  at  the  end  (of 
the  rainy  season)  of  the  fourth  year  ;  aud  slight  rain  the  in  the 
fifth  year. 


2G.  In  the  first  four  yogas  there  will  be  prosperity 
in  the  land;  in  the  next  nr  middle  four  there  will  not  be 
much  of  it  ;  and  in  the  last  four  mankind  will  suffer  miseries 

27.  When  Jupiter  reappears  at  the  beginning  of  the 
constellation  of  Dbanishta  in  the  month  of  Magha,  the  first 
year  of  the  cycle  of  60  years  of  Jupiter  known  as  Brabham 
commences.  In  it  all  creaturea  will  be  happy. 

28.  In  the  same  year  there  will  be  drought,  in  certain 
places  and  suffering  from  storm  and  fire;  the  crops  will  be 
injured;  phlegmatic  maladies  will  afflict  mankind;  neverthe¬ 
less  mankind  will  be  happy, 

29.  The  next  year  is  known  ns  Vibhava  the  third  as 
Suhla,  tho  fourth  as  Pramoda,  aud  the  fifth  as  Prajapati:  in 
each  of  those  years  mankind  will  be  happier  than  in  the  next 
preceding  year. 

30.  In  the  same  four  years  there  will  bo  good  growth 
of  the  Sail  j  crop,  of  sugar  cane,  of  barley  and  other  crops 


*/*'or  ^°nr  rDOI!^a  froai  August  to  November  according  to  the 

[>f  the  rainy  season - 
r« 

%  Bali :  a  specie*  of  rice 


eommealator. 

me-mto™  ^  r*’,'y  sea8on~AaSU8t  !lt,J  September,  according  to  th«  corn^ 


Brihat  Samhita. 


iu  the  land  J  mankind  will  jo  freed  from  all  fear?  and  they 
will  live  a£  peace,  in  happiness  and  without  the  vices  of  the 

Knliyuga 

31  The  five  years  of  the  stcond  yuga  are  known  as 
1.  Angira ,  2.  Snmtkha  3.  Bhava,  4.  Yuva  and  5-  Dhatri. 
Of  these,  during  the  first  three  years  mankind  will  enjoy  hap- 
piuess  and  during  tbs  last  two  they  will  not  enjoy  mooli 

of  it- 

32  Iu  the  first  three  of  the  above  five  years  there 
will  be  abundance  of  rain  nod  mankind  will  to  (reed  from 

fears  and  anxieties;  in  the  loot  two  J™"  »"> 

I, c  moderate  but  disesse  ood  wars  will  afflict  mankind. 

33  The  five  years  of  the  third  yuga  sacred  to  lndra 
arc  known  as  l  Eeswara,  2.  Bahudhmya ,  3.  Pramadhi  4 
Vihrama  and  t>.  Vrisha.  In  the  first  two  years  mankind 
Ll  enjoy  the  toppiK*  °f  Kritayug.  In  the  year  rmmlU 

II,  «y  wilHeel  miserable  but  in  the  yearn  V.krma  ami  ruka  . 
they  will  again  be  happy- 

-  35  The  first  year  of  the  fourth  yuga  is  known  as 

Wabhmu;  in  it  mankind  will  bo  happy.  The  second  »  known 
SuVham.  In  it  mankind  will  bo  neither  happy  nor  mm. 
rable;  them  will  however  bo  disease  in.  the  bind  bnt  no 
deaths  in  consequence. 

36  The  next  year  is  kuown  as  Tarana;  in  it  there  will  bo 
abandonee  of  rain.  The  next  is  known  « 
crops  with  thrive  well  aud  mankind  will  be  happy.  Tin  lift 

year  is  kouwn  as  Vyaya;  in  it  amorous  sensations  will  pre¬ 
vail  over  the  land.  rntMM*n 

37.  The  first  year  of  the  next  yuga  sacred  to  Tuxtfta 

is  known  as  Sarvajlt.  The  next  year  is  known  as  Sxna. 
Aha The  next  throe  years  are  Vlrolhi,  VArila] and  Kh,ra: m 
the  second  of  those,  mankind  will  bo  happy  and  they 
be  afflicted  with  tears  in  the  other  years. 

38.  The  five  years  of  the  next  yuga>re  1-  Nandma 


2.  Vijaya,  3.  Joy  a  4.  Manmatha  5.  Durmuhha :  (luring  the 
first  three  years  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  lanl :  in  Man - 
tnatha  mankind  will  feel  neither  happy,  nor  miserable  and  in 
the  year  Durmukha  they  will  feel  miserable. 

31'.  The  years  of  the  sercnth  yuga  are  1 .  Hemalamba, 
2.  Yilambi,  3.  Vikari,  4.  Scirvari  and  5.  I J lava. 

40.  Io  the  first  of  these  years  crop  (  will  generally  be 
injured  and  there  will  be  storm  and  rain  ;  in  the  second  year 
erojH  will  not  grow  in  abundance  and  the  rainfall  will  not  bo 
much  ;  in  the  third  year  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  fears 
and  there  will  be  much  rain;  in  the  fourth  year  there  will  be 
famine;  in  Plava ,  the  fifth  year,  there  will  ho  prosperity  in 
the  land  and  also  much  rain- 

41.  Tne  first  year  of  the  uoxt  yuga,  sacre  1  to  Visvodeva 
is  Sobhakrit-,  the  next  year  is  known  as  Subhakrit ;  the  third  is 
Krodhi ;  and  the  remaining  years  are  known  as  Ymavasu  and 
Parabhava. 

42.  During  the  first  two  year's  minkiud  will  bo  happy; 
during  the  third  they  will  feel  exceedingly  miserable  and 
during  the  last  two  years  they  willbeueither  happy  nor  miser¬ 
able;  but  in  the  year  Parabhava  there  will  be  fear  from  fire  and 
suffering  from  weapons  and  from  disease;  the  Brahmins  and 
cows  will  also  suffer. 

43.  The  first  year  of  the  ninth  yuga  is  Plavanga,  the 
next  year  is  known  as  Keeldka,  the  third  is  known  as  Soumya 
and  the  last  two  years  a-'e  known  as  Sadharana  and 
UodhMt ;  of  these,  during  the  years  Keelaka  and  Soumya  rasn- 
kiud  will  be  lisppy. 

44.  In  the  year  Plavanga  mankind  will  suffer  much,  in 
Sadharana  there  will  be  slight  rain  and  crops  will  suffer;  in 
the  fifth  year  there  will  be  a  variety  of  rainfall  and  crops 
will  thrive. 


{ 


L}  -1  Reihat  Samhica. 

45,  The  first  year  of  the  next  yaga  sacred  to  Indrag «»  ™ 
known  as  Paridhavi;  the  remaining  years  are  Pramadi,  Awn. 
da,  Tialcshasa  and  An  ala. 

40.  In  the  yoar  Paridhavi  the  ifadhyadesa  will  sufit’r 
the  ruling  princes  will  perish,  there  will  he  slight  rain  and  fear 
from  fire;  in  the  yoar  Prcmadi  mankind  will  bo  disposed  to 
be  inactive;  villagers  will  be  at  strife;  red  flowers  and  red  seed 
will  be  destroyed. 

47.  In  the  next  year  mankind  will  bo  happy.  In  the 
years  Rahshasa  an  1  Analk  there  will  bo  deaths  and  decay  in 
the  land;  in  Bakshasa  again  the  summer  crops  will  thrive  and 
in  Anala  there  will  be  fear  from  fire  and  much  suffering  in  the 
land. 

48.  The  live  years  of  the  eleventh  vugaaro  I.  P  ingala, 
2.  Kalayuhla,  8.  Sulharta,  4.  R owlra,  5.  Durmati.  In  the 
first  yoar  there  will  be  ranch  rain  and  fear  from  thieves  and 
mankind  will  suffer  from  consumption  of  the  lungs  and  the 
like  asthmatic  complaints. 

49.  In  the  year  Kalayukla  mankind  will  suffer  from  vari¬ 
ous  evils;  but  in  Sidharla  they  will  bo  happy  in  mom  ways 
than  one.  In  the  year  R oudfa  mankind  will  suffer  much  and 
there  will  bo  loss  and  ruin  in  the  laud.  In  Durmati.  there  will 
be  moderate  rain. 

50  In  the  twelvetb  yuga  sacred  to  god  Bhaga,  the  first 
year  is  known  as  Dwulubhi ;  the  crops  will  thrive  well.  The 
next  year  is  known  as  TJdgan ;  in  it  the  ruling  sovereigns  will 
perish  and  fchoro  will  not  be  good  rain, 

51.  The  third  year  is  known  as  Rahshasa;  in  it  there 
will  be  fear  from  the  attack  of  tasked  animals,  and  mankind 
will  suffer  from  disease.  The  fourth  year  is  known  as  Kvodha ; 
in  it  there  will  be  anger  in  the  land  and  countries  will  be  ruined 
in  consequence  of  internal  strife. 


Bbihat  Samhita. 


52.  The  last  year  of  the  last  yuga  is  Kshaya  ;  there 
will  then  be  much  rain  in  the  land  the  Brahmins  will  be 
afflicted  with  fear  and  farmers  will  prosper.  The  Vysyas  and 
Sudras  will  be  happy  as  also  persons  that  deprive  others  of 
their  property.  Thus  have  been  described  briefly  the  effects 
of  the  sixty  years  of  Jupiter’s  cycle. 

53.  If  the  disc  of  Jupitor  be  full  of  pure  rays  and  Urge 
and  appear  of  the  color  of  white  jasmine  or  white  water  lily 
or  orystal  and  if  he  does  not  suffer  by  occultation  by  or  con¬ 
junction  with,  other  planets  and  when  ho  is  in  his  good  coarse 
mankind  will  bo  happy . 


CHAPTER  IX. 

On  Venus. 

1 .  The  eeliplio  is  divided  into  nioo  divisions  known  as 
Ye&dhis  (paths).  According  to  some  each  division  consists  of 
three  constellations  beginning  from  Aswini  :  these  divisions 
are  technically  known  as  1.  Naga  (serpent),  2.  Oaja  (ele¬ 
phant)  ,  3,  Iravaia  (the  divine  elephant  or  serpent),  4.  Vri~ 
sbMna  (bull),  5,  Qo(cowJ,  6.  Jaradgava  (old  ox),  7,  Mri- 
ga  (deer),  8.  Aja  (ram),  9.  Dahana  (lire). 

2.  According  to  others  the  Naga  Veedhi  consists  of  the 
constellations  of  Swali ,  Barani  and  Kritik  a  ;  the  Gaja  Veedhi 
of  the  three  constellations  from  Bohini ;  the  IravataVeedhi 
of  the  throe  from  Funarmsu  ;  the  Vrishablia  Veedhi  of  tho 
three  from  Magha ;  the  Go  Veedhi  of  Aswati,  Bevat,  Poorva- 
bhxdrapada  and  Utlarabhadeapada. 

3.  The  Jaradgava  Veedhi  consists  oE  the  three  constella¬ 
tion#  from  Sravana ;  the  Mriga  Veedhi  of  the  three  from 
Anv.radha ;  the  Aja  Veedhi  oiJJasta,  Visaliha,  and  f'littra  j  and 
the  Dahana  Veedhi  consists  of  the  two  constellations  Poorva- 
shadha  and  Uttarashadln. 


Bbjha*  Bimhita, 


».J 


§L 


4.  Of  tho  nine  Veedhis  tbe  first  three  are  known  as  tbo 
northern  Veedhis  ;  the  next  three  as  the  central  Veedhis  and 
the  last  three  as  the southex’n  Veedhis.  Again  in  tho  case  of 
each  three  the  first  is  known  as  tho  northern  Voedhi,  the  second 
aa  the  central  Veedhi  and  tho  last  as  tho  Southern  Voedhi. 


5.  According  to  some  the  position  of  a  Veedhi  follows 
that  of  the  Yoga  Tara  (chief  star)  of  the  particular  constel¬ 
lation  ;  so  that  if  tho  star  should  bo  on  tho  north  of  tho  eclip¬ 
tic,  tbe  Veedhi  is  known  as  tho  northern  one ;  if  on  tho  eclip¬ 
tic,  it  is  knowu  aa  the  oantral  ouo  and  if  on  thq  south  of 
tho  ecliptic,  it  is  known  as  tho  southern  one. 


6.  According  to  others  tho  nine  constellations  from 
Bharani  form  the  northern  Veedhi  or  path,  the  nine  from 
Poorvaphalyuni  form  the  central  path  and  tho  nine  from 
Foorvashadha  form  tho  Southern  path. 

7.  If  writerson  Jotishasaatra  should  disagree  it  ia  not 
for  me  to  determine  the  correct  view  ;  I  havo  only  to  abate  the 
views  here  of  several  authors. 

8-  If  Venus  should  either  dis  ippeat  ox*  reappear  *  ia  a 
northern  Voedhi  there  will  bo  prosperity  and  happiness  in  tho 
land ;  if  in  a  centra!  Veodhi  there  will  not  be  much  of  either; 
and  if  in  a  southern  Veedhi  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with 
miseries. 

9.  If  Venus  should  disappear  or  reappear  in  the  several. 
Veedhis  beginning  from  the  northern  most  one  tbe  condition 
of  the  world  will  respectively  bo  i.  v^ry  excellent,  2.  ex¬ 
cellent,  3.  good,  4.  fair,  5.  moderate,  6.  tolerable,  7.  poor, 

8.  very  poor,  9,  miserable. 

10.  The  four  constellations  from  Bharani  are  known  as 
tho  first  mandalct  (circle  or  division),  i  f  Venus  should  re¬ 
appear  in  it  there  will  be  prosperity  .  h  1  id  ;  the  people  of 


*  Venn®  disappears  when  within  10  dtv  <  tho  Stm  and  roappears 

beyond  that  limit. 


Brihat  Samhita. 

and  oE  Anyt* ,  the  M&bish&s,  the  Balhikfis,  and  tti© 
Kalingas  will  be  afflicted  with  fears. 

1 1  If  Venus,  who  so  reappears  in  the  Slid  circle,  should 


be  crossed  by  a  plant,  the  rulers  of  bho  1 3hudycist)  of  the  Aswcis, 
of  the  Samsonakas  ami  ot  the  Youdheyas  and  o tKolivaraha* 
will  perish. 


12  The  four  constellations  from  Ardra  form  the  second 
Mandaia  or  circle ;  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it,  the  rainfall 
will  be  moderate  and  the  growth  of  food  crop3  will  also  be 
moderate  ;  the  Brahmins  will  suffer,  especially  those  who  are 

wicked. 


13.  If  Venus  who  so  reappears  in  the  said  circle,  should 
be  crossed  by  a  planet,  the  Mlechas,  fores trnon,  persons  thut 
live  by  dogs,  the  hill  men  of  Gomanta  and  Qonards,  the  Chan* 
dalas,  the  Sudras  and  the  people  of  Videha  will  become  wick¬ 
ed  and  lawless. 


14,  The  five  constellations  from  M*gha  form  the  tfuru  man- 
data:  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it,  crops  will  suffer;  there 
will  also  be  suffering  from  hunger  and  robbers.  Ohandalas 
will  prosper  and  there  will  be  an  intermingling  of  castes. 


15.  If  Venus,  who  so  reappears  in  the  said  mandaia, 
should  bo  crossed  by  a  planet,  shepherds,  hunters,  the  Sudras, 
the  Fund  as,  the  border  Mlechas,  the  Sulikas,  forestmen, 
the  Dravidaa  and  persons  who  live  close  to  tho  sea  will  be 
afflicted  with  miseries. 


16.  The  three  constellations  from  Swati  form  the  fourth 
mandaia:  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it,  mankind  will  be  free 
from  fear;  the  Brahmins  and  Kshatryas  will  prosper  and  friends 
will  turn  into  enemies. 


17.  If  Venus,  whoso  reappears  in  the  said  mandaia,  should 


*  Kotivar&ha  :  the  city  of  revikote  ic  the  Coromandel  Coast. 


Brijiat  Simeita. 


„  cro39ja  by  a  plausfc,  the  chiefs  of  the  hunters  will  parish; 
tfao  Ikshwakus,  the  border  Mlechas,  the  people  of  Arianti  and 
of  Poli-i<la  and  the  Sam^ias  will  aUo  perish. 


18.  The  five  constellations  from  Jyesht*  form  the  fifth 
mandala;  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it,  the  people  of  Cash- 
mere,  tho  Aamakas,  fcho  Matayas,  those  living  on  the  banka 
of  the  Charn fieri  an.fi  in  the  country  of  Avaufci  will  anfTer  from 
lunger,  from  thieves  and  from  disease. 


19.  It  YetiUK  who  so  reappears  ia  the  saul  mandala  should 
be  crossed  by  a  planet,  the  Abhiras,  the  Dr'widas,  the  Ambas- 
tas,  tho  Trigartas,  the  Sourashtras,  tho  people  of  Hindh  aufi 
of  Souviraka  and  tho  ruler  of  Benares  will  perish. 


20.  The  sis  constellations  from  Dhauishta  form  the  sixth 
mandala;  if  Venus  should  reappear  in  it  there  will  be  wealth 
and  prosperity  in  the  land  and  cows  will  thrive  and  crops  will 
be  abundant  bat  fear  in  certain  placoa. 


21.  If  Venus,  who  so  reappears  in  the  sai  l  mandala^ 
should'  be  crossed  by  a  planet,  the  Sulikas,  the  people  of 
Candabar  and  of  Avanti  will' be  afflicted  with  miseries.  The 
Yidohas  will  perish.  The  servants  of  the  harder  Miochas  and 
of  the  Yavanas  will  prosper. 

22-  If  Yenus  should  reappear  or  be  crossed  by  a  planet 
in  tho  western  portion  of  the  mandalas  beginning  from  Swati 
and  from  Jyeshta  or  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the  mandala 
beginning  from  ilagha,  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  land;  in 
all  the  other  mandalas  the  effects  will  be  the  same  as  those 

already  described  whereever  Yenus  might  happen  to  reappear 


or  bo  flion  crossed.  ,.i 

28.  If  Yeans  should  be  visible  before  sunset  tb  re  wiU 
be  fear  in  the  land;  if  visible  throughout  the  day,  mankind 
will  suffer  from  hunger  and  from  disease  ;  it  visible  a  mu  - 
day  in  conjunction  with  the  moon,  the  king  s  army,  and  capital 


city  will  suffer. 


Bihha/*  Sa.ii  hit  a, 


[Ch.\» 

If  Venus  should  pass  through  the  constellation  of 
tho  Earth  will  be  bo  much  enundated  with  water  as 
to  make  its  surface  even. 


25.  If  Venus  should  pass  through  the  constellation  of 

Robini,  Earth  will  assume  the  same  appearance  of  death  and 
devastation  as  if  she  was  going  through  the  ceremony  of  Ka- 
palika  for  the  expiation  of  the  siaof  murder. 


26.  If  Venus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Mrigasir- 
eha,  juice  and  crops  will  suffer;  if  she  should  enter  the  cons¬ 
tellation  of  Ardra,  the  people  of  Kosala  and  of  Kalinga  will 
suffer  and  there  will  be  abundance  of  rain. 


27.  If  Venus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Punar. 
vasu,  the  people  of  Ashmaka  and  of  Vidarbtia  will  become  law¬ 
less.  If  Venus  should  enter  the  constellation  ot  Pashya, 
there  will  he  good  rain;  singing  and  dancing  parties  will  suffer. 


28.  If  Venus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Aslesha, 
there  will  be  much  suffering  from  se<*pmts;  if  Venus  should 
pass  through  the  constellation  of  Magha,  elephant  keepers  or 
ministers  will  suffer  and  there  willba  abundance  of  rain. 


29.  If  Venus  should  pass  through  tho  constellation  of 
Poorvaphalguni,  hill  men  and  the  people  of  Pulinda  will 
pemh  and  there  will  be  abundance  of  rain  ;  if  she  should 
pasi  through  the  constellation  of  Uttaraphalguni ,  the 
people  of  Kuru;  of  Jangala  and  of  Pancbala  will  perish,  and 
there  will  also  be  rain. 

80.  If  she  should  pass  through  the  constellation  of 
Uasta,  tho  Kouravas,  and  painters  will  suffer;  there  will  be 
no  rain  ;  well-diggers  and  birds  will  suffer.  If  she  should 
enter  the  constellation  of  Chitfcra,  there  will  be  good  ram. 

31.  If  sho  should  enter  the-  constellation  of  Swati 
there  will  be  much  rain  ;  servants,  merchants  and  boatmen 
will  become  wicked  and  lawless.  If  she  should  enter  the 

H  i 


Bbiha#  Samhita, 


Constellation  of  Visakha,  there  will  bo  good  rain  and  trades 
mer  will  suffer. 


32.  If  she  should  enter  the  constellation  of  Anusha, 
rulers  will  be  at  strife  ;  if  she  should  enter  the  constellation 
of  Jyesta,  the  chief  rulers  will  suffer;  if  she  should  enter  the 
constellation  of  Moola,  physicians  that  deal  in  medicinal 
plants  will  suffer.  In  each  of  these  three  cases  thoi'o  will  bo 
drought  in  the  land. 

33.  If  Venus  should  entor  the  constellation  of  Poorva 
shadha,  the  creatures  of  water  will  suffer;  if  she  should 
enter  the  constellation  of  Utturaahadha,  diseases  will  in¬ 
crease.  If  she  should  entor  the  constellation  of  Sravana, 
diseases  of  the  ear  will  afflict  mankind.  If  she  should  enter 
the  constellation  of  Dhanivhta,  heretics  will  suffer. 

34.  If  Vemn'  should  cuter  the  constellation  of  Satabhi- 
frhak,  drunkards  or  dealers  in  liquor  will  suffer  ;  if  she  should 
enter  the  constellation  of  Poorvabhadra,  gamblers  will  suffer 
as  well  as  the  Konravas  and  the  Panchalas,  and  there  will  be 
rain  in  the  land. 

35.  If  Venus  should  enter  the  constellation  of  ffttara- 
bhadra,  fruits  and  roots  will  be  injured  ;  if  she  should  enter 
the  constellation  of  llovati,  travellers  will  suffer;  if  she 
should  enter  Aswini,  borsekeepers  will  suffer  and  if  she 
should  enter  Bharani,  hillmen  and  the  Yavauas  will  suffer. 

36.  It  Venus  should  either  reappear  or  disappear  in  the 
8th,  14th,  or  15th  lunar  day  of  the  waning  moon,  the  Earth 
will  be  flooded  with  water. 

37.  If  Jupiter  and  Venus  should  bo  opposite  to,  that 
is,  180°  apart  from,  each  other  and  if  they  should  be  at  the 
same  time  due  east  and  went  of  each  other,  mankind  will 
suffer  Jrcm  disease, from  fears  and  from  sorrow,  and  there 

will  be  no  rain. 


Bkihai  Samhita. 


33.  If  the  course  of  -Jupiter,  Mercury,  Mars  and 
Saturn  should  just  precede  that  of  Venus,  mankind,  eleph¬ 
ants  and  magicians  will  be  at  strife  among  fchomselvea  ;  storms 
and  deaths  will  afflict  mankind. 


39.  Friends  will  cease  to  be  friends  ;  the  Brahmins 
will  cease  to  perform  religions  ceremonies  properly  ;  there 
will  bo  uo  rain  ;  and  mountains  will  bo  riven  asunder  by 
thunderbolts. 

40.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  just  precede  that  of 
Venus,  the  Mlechas,  cats,  elephants,  as30s,  buffaloes,  black 
grains,  hogs,  barbarians,  the  Sudras  and  travellers  in  tbo 
south  will  suffer  by  diseases  of  the  eye  aud  by  windy  dis¬ 
orders. 


41.  If  the  course  of  Mars  should  just  precede  that  of 
Venus,  mankind  will  suffer  from  fire,  from  woapeons,  from  hun¬ 
ger,  from  drought  and  from  thieves ;  all  the  creatures  and 
objects  of  the  north  will  suffer  and  the  sky  will  be  filled  with 
fire,  lightning  and  dust. 

42.  If  the  course  of  .Jupiter  should  just  precede  that  of 
V.  nv  ,  he  will  destroy  objects  that  aro  white,  the  Brahmins, 
cows  and  temples ;  the  east  will  suffer ;  there  will  be  a  fall  of 
bail  from  the  clouds  and  diseases  of  the  neck ;  tko  crops  of 
Sarafc  will  thrive  well. 

43.  If  the  courso  of  Mercury  should  just  precede  that  of 
Venus,  and  if  Mercury  should  then  have  either  disappeared  or 
reappeared,  there  will  be  vain  in  tho  land  ;  diseases  and  fcili. 
ous  jaundice  will  afflict  mankind  ;  the  crops  of  Greeshma  will 
flourish ;  ascetics,  persons  who  have  performed  sacrificial 
rites,  phy  sicians,  daucors  or  wrestlers,  horses,  the  Vysias,  cows, 
rulers  in  their  chariots  and  all  yellow  objects  will  perish  aud 
the  west  will  suffer. 

44.  If  Venus  should  be  of  the  color  of  fire,  thero  will  be 
fear  from  fire  $  if  of  blood  color,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land 


felllo.]  Bbihat  Samiita.  rt 

■  V 

]gp$f  the  color  of  bttr  ii  ’wd  gold,  there  will  be  disease  ;  If' 
green,  there  will  be  asthmatic  complaints;  .f  r  shy-pale  or 
black,  there  will  he  dr<  nght  vtt  the  land. 

45.  If  Venus  should  he  of  the  color  of  coagulated  milk, 
of  the  white  water  lily,  or  of  the  moon,  or  if  her  coarse  be 
direct,  or  if  she  should  be  the  successful  planet  in  conjunc¬ 
tions,  mankind  will  enjoy  the  happiness  of  Kritayuga. 


CHAPTEtt  X. 


On  Saturn. 

1 .  1/  the  disc  of  Saturn  should  appear  glossy  and  if  his 
course  should  lie  through  the  constellations  of  Sravana,  Swati, 
Hast  a,  Ardra,  Bliarani,  or  Poorvaphalguni,  the  Earth  wilt  he 
covered  with  water. 

2.  If  his  course  should  lie  through  the  constellations  of 
Ayulia,  Satahbiflhak,  Jyesht.,  there  will  he  prosperity  iu  th« 
land  but  slight  rain  ;  if  his  course  should  lie  through  Aioola, 
mankind  will  suffer  from  hunger,  from  weapons  and  from 
drought*  Wo  will  now  proceed  to  state  the  effects  of  Se turn’s 
course  through  ench  of  the  27  constellations. 

3.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  first 
constellation  of  Aswini,  horses,  h  u-se-keepers,  poets,  physi¬ 
cians  and  ministers  will  perish.  If  it  should  lie  through  the 
constellation  of  Bharani,  dancers,  players  on  musical  instru¬ 
ments,  vocal  siDgers,  low  people  and  deceitful  men  will  perish. 

4.  If  his  course  should  lie  through  the  coustellation  of 
Krittikn,  person*  that  live  by  fire  and  commanders  of  armies 
will  perish ;  and  if  through  Tiohini,  the  people  of  Ko3*la,'of 
Matltra,  of  Benares  and  of  Pauchata  and  carriage  drivers  will 
Buffer. 

6,  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons- 


Beiuat  Samhita. 


[Ch. 


_ of  Mrigaseerska,  the  people  of  Viitsa,  *  the  officiating 

priests  in  sacrificial  rites  as  well  as  the  persons  that  perform 
tbem*  reverend  men  and  blj&  people  of  Madhyadesa  will  suffer 
miseries ;  if  through  Ardra,  the  people  of  Paratha,  and  of 
Rarnata,  oil  mongers,  washermen  acid  thieves  will  suffer. 


(5.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons¬ 
tellation  of  Punarvasu,  the  I’anchalas,  the  border  Mlechas 
and  the  people  of  Surat,  of  Sind  and  of  Sonviraka  will  suffer 
miseries  ;  if  his  course  should  lie  through  the  constellation  of 
Pushya,  bell  ringers,  criers,  the  Yavanas;  tradesmen,  deceit¬ 
ful  mon  and  flowers  will  suffer. 


7.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  he  through  the  cons¬ 
tellation  of  Ayulya,  the  creatures  of  water  and  serpents  will 
suffer  ;  if  through  the  oonstellation  of  Magha,  the  Balhikasj 
the  Chinese,  the  peopleof  Candahar,  of  Sulika  and  of  Paratha, 
the  Vyaias,  store  houses  and  merchants  will  suffer. 


8.  If  his  course  should  lie  through  the  constellation  of 
Poorvaphalguni,  juice  sellers,  prostitutes,  virgins  and  the 
Maharashtras  will  suffer  miseries;  if  through  Uttaraphalguni* 
kings,  ascetics,  jaggery,  salt,  water  and  the  town  of  Taksha- 
sila  in  thn  Punjab  will  suffer. 

9.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons¬ 
tellation  of  Hasta,  barbers,  mill-men,  thieves,  physicians, 
weavers,  elephant  keepers,  prostitutes,  the  Kosalakas,  and 
garland  makers  will  suffer. 

10.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons¬ 
tellation  of  Chifcra,  women,  writers,  painters,  various  utensils 
will  suffer;  if  through  Swati,  the  people  of  Magada,  reporters, 
messengers,'  charioteers,  marines,  dancers  ana  the  like  will 

suffer  miseries* 


11.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the 
constellation  of  Visakha,  the  Trigartas,  the  Chinese  and  the 


*  Vaua  :  name  of  a  country  j  its  chief  town  ia  Kouanmbha. 


10 


Brihat  Samhita. 


saffron,  shel-lac,  crops,  every 
or  crimson  color  will  snffor- 


<8L 

thing  of  bright,  red 


12.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the 
constellation  of  Anuradha,  the  Kulntaa,  the  iangaiias  *  and 
the  Khasas,  the  people  of  Gash  more,  ministers,  drivers,  and 
bell-ringers  will  suffer  and  frionds  will  turn  into  enemies. 


13.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the 
constellation  of  Jyeshta,  the  Icing’s  chaplain,  the  king’s  favo¬ 
rites,  valient  soldiers,  and  mixed  crowds  of  men  of  different 
castes  will  suffer ;  if  through  Moola.  the  people  of  Benares, 
of  Kosala,  and  of  Panchala,  fruits,  medicinal  plants  and  sol¬ 


diers  will  suffer. 

14.  If  his  course  should  lio  through  the  constellation 
of  Poorvashadha,  the  poople  of  Anga,  of  Vangs,  ot  Kosala, 
of  Girivrajaf  of  Magada,  of  Pundra,  ot  Mitila  and  of  Tarn- 


ralipta  f  will  suffer  miseries. 


15.  If  tho  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the  cons¬ 
tellation  of  Uttarashadha,  the  people  of  Dasarna,  §  tho  Yava- 
aas,  tho  people  of  Oojain,  barbarians,  the  poople  of  i’aryatra, 
and  the  Kunty-bhojas  will  suffer. 


16.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lio  through  Sravana 


'  public  officials,  the  chief  Brahmins,  physicians,  and  priests 

and  the  people  of  Kalmgrv  will  suffer  miseries.  If  his  coarse 
should  lie  through  Dhanishta,  the  ruler  ef  Magada  will 
become  triumphant;  and  treasury  officers  will  prosper. 

17.  If  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  the 
constellations  of  Satahhishak  and  Poorvabhadra,  physicians, 
poots,  drunkards  or  those  that  deal  in  liquor,  tradesmen  and 
ministers,  will  be  afflicted  with  miseries  -,  if  it  should  lio 


•  Tangwins :  name  of  ..  people  m  the  upper  part  of  tho  .alley  of  Sarayu. 

+  Gin  v  raj  a  :  name  of  the  capital  of  fttag&dft. 

t  TamraVota  ;  name  of  a  people  near  the  western  mouth  of  the  Gauges. 

§  Pagan*  :  name  of  a  people  living  south  east  of  Madhyado**  m  tbe 
centio  of  Hindustan, 


lers,  women  and  gold  will  suffer. 


■»@L 

dancers,  travel- 


18.  H  the  course  of  Saturn  should  lie  through  Revati, 
the  servant*  of  the  reigning  sovereigns,  the  people  of  Krou- 
chadvipa,  the  crops  of  Sarat,  barbarians  and  the  1  avanas 
•will  suffer. 

19.  If,  while  Saturn  is  in  Kritika,  Jupiter  should  be  in 
tha  constellation  of  Visokha,  mankind  will  then  become  very 
wicked.  If  both  the  planets  should  be  in  one  and  tho  same 
constellation  the  chief  towns  will  suffer. 

20.  If  Saturn  should  appear  variegated  in  color,  birds 
will  perish  ;  if  yellow-,  thero  will  be  fear  from  hunger  ;  if  of 
blood  color,  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land  and  if  of  ashy 
color,  mankind  will  be  very  much  at  strife. 


21.  If  Saturn  should  appear  as  bright  as  the  cats’ eye 
gem  or  puro  or  of  tho  color  of  the  bana  (a  blnok  flower)  or 
Atasi  t  flower,  maukindwill  be  happy.  Whatever  may  bo  tho 
color  of  Saturn,  the  persons  who  or  objects  which  correspond 
to  the  particular  color  will  suffer,  [t] 


CHAPTER  XL 


On  Comets  and  Tins  like. 

1 .  Having  examined  the  treatises  c>f  Garga,  Parasara, 
Dfvala  and  many  others  on  Kotus  §,  I  now  proceed  to 

give  a  clem  account  of  the  same. 

2.  'lhe  reappearance  or  disappearance  of  the  Kotus  is 

not  subject  to  astronomical  calculations,  t  he  Ketus  are  of 
three  kinds — celestial,  etherial  and  terrestrial. 


»~KruachadTip»  or  Kroonciia :  a  mountain  or  part  of  the  Himalayan 
range  situated  ia  the  saltern  part  of  the  chain  on  the  north  of  Assam. 

+  Ataei :  common  flax  bearing  a  bine  flower. 

to  e  •  it  white  the  Brahmins,  if  red  the  Kihatnya*.  if  yellow  tho  Vysyat, 
if  Mack'the  Sudras  and  if  blue  the  Chandalns  will  suffer. 

a  KetusiTbis  term  1*  defined  by  the  Author  in  stanza  3,  and  is  made 
t*  include  Comets,  meteor,  falling  stare,  solar  and  lunar  spots  and  the  like 
liminou*  btdierf. 


1  Bkieat  Samhita.. 

Ketus  aro  luminous  appearances  resembling  fire 


.  iihout  the  power  toconsnme  objects-the  glow  worm, certain 
phosphorescent  nppoarances,  gems,  precious  stov  es  and  the 
like  excepted. 

4.  The  etherial  Kotns  appear  in  flag  staffs,  implements 
of  war,  houses,  trees,  horses,  elephants  and  the  like.  1  ho 
celestial  Ketus  appear  in  stellar  regions  aod  tho  terrestrial  o  :es 
appear  in  pits  and  low  grounds  in  tho  surface  of  tho  Barth. 

5.  Some  writers*  say  that  the  Ketusare  101  iu  number; 
otherst  say  that  they  are  1,000  in  number;  N  ada  says  that 
there  is  hut  oue  Kef.u  which  appears  iu  various  liapes  at 
various  times. 

6.  Whether  there  is  one  Ketu  or  many,  tho  ffeets  to  bo 
described  are  various  and  these  effects  depend  on  their 
reappearance  or  disappearance  (at  partiaular  times  and  places) 
their  positions,  the  heavenly  bodies  with  which  they  might 


appear  t.o  be  in  contact  and  on  their  colors. 

7.  The  effects  will  last  for  as  many  months  as  the  num¬ 
ber  of  days  during  which  the  Ketus  coufciuua  to  bo  visible;  if 
visible  for  months,  the  effects  will  last  for  years  %).  he  effects 
will  commence  after  three  weeks  from  such  appearances. 

8.  Generally  if  the  luminous  body  or  comet  be  small 
clear,  glossy,  straight,  transient,  white  and  visible  either 
immediately  after  their  appearance  or  some  time  afterward* 
there  will  bo  health  and  happiness  in  the  land. 

9.  If  it  be  the  opposite  of  these,  or  of  sh  shape  of  the 
rainbow  or  with  two  or  three  tails,  mankind  will  ‘,v  os  happy. 

1 0-  The  Ketus  or  comets  that  resembl  1  ads,  gem* 
and  gold  are  named  Kirana  Ketus  and  are  2 &  in  n  mhof;  they 
have  toils  and  appear  in  the  East  and  in  the  Wes  ;  bey  are 
the  sons  of  the  Sun,  and  when  they  appear,  princt  s  will  begin 
to  bo  at  strife. 


*  PwM&ia  for  instance. 

+  G&rga  tor  instance. 

t  The  Commentator  say*:  From  i  to  24 days  of  Yu^.>  ij  tae  eff  o«*wul 
last  from.  1  to  24months.  Fiota  25  to  30  days  of ’Tisi-oil.  j  tf 

visible  for  months  lor  instance,  the  effects  mil  l**t  t  *  4  *  j  f  **  *  years* 


3EIHA1  SlMHITA, 


The  Ketus  that  aro  of  the  color  of  the  parrot 
^  F§f of  Bhandhu- Jivika*  flower,  of  Bhel-lac  or  of  blood  aro 
the  sons  of  Agui  (fire)  and  appear  in  the  South  East;  they  are 


25  in  number;  when  they  appear  mankind  will  bo  afflicted 


with  fears. 

12.  The  Ketus  or  comets  whose  tails  are  bent  and  which 
:a*e  of  sharp  rays  and  black  are  the  sons  of  Yaraa;  they  are 
25  in  number;  they  appear  in  the  South  ;  when  they  appear 
there  will  be  deaths  in  th«  land. 

13.  The  Ketus  or  comets  f  that  appear  liko  a  mirror, 


are  round  in  shape  without  tails  but  with  rays  and  looking 


liko  oil  or  water  arc  the  sous  of  the  G  iroh;  they  are  23  in  num¬ 
ber,  and  appear  in  the  North-East;  when  they  appear  man¬ 
kind  will  be  afflicted  with  fear  and  hunger. 

J4.  The  Ketu3  or  Comets  that  appear  bright  like  tho 
moon,  silver,  snow,  white  jasmine  and  the  white  water  lily 
are  the  sons  of  the  moon  ;  they  appear  in  tho  North  and  aro  S 
in  number;  when  they  appear  mankind  will  bo  happy. 

15.  Tho  single  Comet  possessing  three  tails  and  throe 
colors  is  named  Brahmadauda  and  is  the  son  of  Brahma;  it 
appears  anywhere;  when  it  appears  the  world  will  come  to  an 


end. 


K>  Thus  have  been  stated  briefly  ’01  Ketus  and  we 
will  now  proceed  to  state  clearly  the  1,000  Ketus  already  re¬ 


ferred  to. 

1 7.  The  Comets  thatappear  in  the  North  and  North 
East  are  84  iu  number;  they  aro  the  sons  of  Venus;  they  have 
large,  white  and  shining  discs  and  when  they  appear  mankind 


Wriil  not  bo  happy- 

18.  The  comets  that  appear  glossy,  with  rays  and  double 
tailed  are  00  in  uurnber;  they  are  the  sous  of  Saturn;  they  ap¬ 
pear  anywhere  and  are  named  Kanaka  Ketus;  when  they 
appear  mankind  will  feel  very  misserable. 

#  BhaodhujUika:  Pom&petea  Phoenicea-  -  a  plant  with  a  red  flower 
which  opens  at  mid-day  and  withers  nw»ytheuGxt  morning  at  sunrise, 
called  in  tamil  Q&ihun 


Bbihat  Samhita. 

9.  The  Comets  which  are  white,  of  single  due,  with  oat 
tails  and  glossy  are  named  Vikacha  Ketus  and  are  the  sons 
of  Jupiter.  They  are  65  in  number  ;  they  appear  in  tho 
South  and  when  they  appear  mankind  will  not  be  happy. 

20.  The  Comets  that  are  neither  very  bright  nor  clearly 
visible  to  the  naked  eye,  and  that  are  long  and  white  are 
named  faskara  Ketus  ;  they  are  tho  sons  of  Mercury ,  they 
appear  any  where  and  are  51  in  number  .  when  they  appear 
mankind  will  feel  miserable. 


21.  The  Comets  which  are  of  the  color  of  blood  or  fire 
and  with  three  tail  s  are  named  Kumkuraa  Ketus:  they  are 
the  sons  of  Mars  and  are  60  in  number,  they  appear  in  the 
North  and  when  they  appear  mankind  will  feel  miserable. 

22.  The  Ketus  that  appear  as  spots  in  the  solar  and 
lunar  discs  are  33  in  number.  They  are  named  us  Tamasa 
and  Keelaka  Ketus.  They  aro  the  sons  of  Rahu.  Their 
effects  have  been  Btated  in  the  Chapter  on  the  Sun  (vide 
stanza  7.  Ch.S.) 


23.  The  Comets  that  resemble  the  fl  uuing  fire  or  a  gar¬ 
land  are  1 20  in  number.  They  are  the  sons  of  Agoi  and  are 
named  Visvarupa  Ketus.  When  they  appear  there  will  be 
fear  from  fire. 


24.  The  Comets  that  aro  dark-red  in  color,  without  disc, 
presenting  th©  appearance  of  Chamara*  and  with  scattered 
rays  are  named  Aruna  Ketus.  'They  are  tho  sous  of  Yayu 
(The  wind)  and  are  77  in  number  ;  when  they  appear  mankind 
will  feel  miserable. 


25.  The  Comets  that  resemble  clusters  of  stars  are 
named  Granaka  Ketus  ;  they  are  8  in  number  and  aie  the  sous 
of  Prajapati.  Those  that  are  obkmgularf  in  shape,  are  204 
iu  number  and  are  tho  sons  of  Brahma. 


*  Cham&ra  :  the  bushy  tail  ol  tho  Bos  Grunnieni. 
f  Garga  says  triangular. 


BrTHAT  SaMHTTA*  [CH- 

W  20.  1  he  Comets  that  res-  ruble  clusters  of  bamboo  can 

and  that  areas  bright  U3  the  moon  aro  named  Kanka  Ivetas; 
they  ate 'he  sons  of  Vanina  and  are  32  in  number.  When 
they  appear  mankind  will  suffer  miseries. 


27.  The  Comets  that  resemble  a  headless  trunk  are 
namo  i  Kab  uidha  Kefcus  ;  they  are  the  sons  of  Yama  and 
aro  96  in  number  ;  and  aro  without  discs  ;  when  they  appear 
there  will  bo  much  fear  all  oyer  the  Earth. 


28.  The  Comets  that  are  white  possessing  a  single  disc 
are  9  in  number;  they  appear  in  die  four  corners.  Thus  wo 
have  given  an  account  of  1,000  Kofcus.  We  shall  now  give  a 
few  particulars  connected  with  them. 

29.  Vasa  Ketu  is  a  comet  which  lies  with  its  head 
towards  the  North ;  it  is  of  largo  size,  glossy,  and  appears 
In  the  west.  When  it  appeal^  there  will  be  immediate  * 
deaths  in  the  land  but  prosperity  in  the  end. 

30.  liasti  Ketu  resembles  the  Vasa  Ketu;  but  if  it 
rippcam  of  sharp  rays,  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land.  Sastra 
Ketu  also  resembles  the  Vasa  Kotu  but  is  glossy  and  appears 
in  the  West ;  and  when  it  appears,  there  will  bo  wars  and 
deaths  in  the  land. 


31.  Kapala  Ketu  is  visible  ou  now-moon  days;  its 
tail  is  of  the  color  of  smoke:  its  course  lies  through  the 
eastern  half  of  the  visible  hemisphoro;  when  it  appears  man¬ 
kind  will  suffer  from  hunger,  death,  drought  and  disease. 

32.  Roadra  Kotu  is  a  comet  resembling  the  dagger's 
end  and  is  of  a  dull  red  color ;  it  appears  f  in  fcho  South-East 
and  travels  through  a  third  of  fcho  sky  ami  produces  the  sauio 
effects  as  the  Kapala Keto. 

88.  Chain  Ketu  is  a  comet  which  appears  in  the  West 
with  a  tail  an  inchin  length  pointing  to  the  Sou fch; as  it  pro¬ 
ceeds  move  and  move  towards  the  North,  it  increases  ia  length. 


*  Oa  the  da*  of  appearance  according  to  commentator, 
f  A  boot  tbo  constellation  of  Ashadh*  accord  infs  to  commentator. 


BrIHA.1  SaMHITA. 

the  Ursa  Major  or  tho 
t,  it  turns  bick  and  after  travelling 

one  half  of  the  sky  disappears  in  the  South. 

35  When  this  Ketu  appears,  the  country  between 
AUahabad  and  Oojeiu,  the  forests  near  Ajmero.the  north,  the 
country  of  Devika  and  Madhyadesa  will  perish. 

30  The  other  countries  will  also  suffer  in  several  places 

from  disease  and  from  famine;  the  effects  described  will  last 
for  10  months  according  to  some  aud  for  18  months  according 

to  others (+). 

37.  Sweta  Ketu  is  a  comet  which  appears  in  the  East 
about  midnight  with  its  tail  pointing  to  the  South.  Ka  Ketu 
is  a  comet  of  the  shape  of  a  carriage  pole  aud  appears  in  the 
West.  Both  the  above  Ketus  are  seen  simultaneously 

for  7  days. 


38.  If  both  should  appear  glossy,  there  will  be  pros* 

parity  and  happiness  in  the  land;  if  the  Ka  Ketu  should  bo 
visible  for  over  7  days,  there  will  be  much  suffering  from  wars 
for  ton  years. 

39.  Tho  Sweta  Ketu  is  of  the.  shape  of  the  twisted  hair 

and  of  a  dull  and  disagreeable  aspect;  it  travels  ^through  a 
third  of  the  sky  and  then  retraces  its  steps.  When  it  disap* 
pears  it  leaves  only  a  third  of  mankind  as  survivors. 

40.  Rasmi  Ketu  is  a  comet  possessing  a  tail  B’.ightly 
colored  like  smoke;  it  appears  in  the  constellation  of  Kritika. 
The  effects  are  the  same  as  those  assigned  to  Sweta  Ketu. 

41.  Dhruva  Ketu  is  a  comet  possessing  no  fixed  course^ 
color  or  shape  aud  appears  anywhere  in  the  heavens,  in  the  sky 
and  on.  Earth.  When  it  appears  glossy,  mankind  will  be  happy 


f  For  8  jreara 


according  to  Parasara  and  Garga. 


42,  To  tlxose  wbose  death  raicrht  be  near  this  Ketu  appears 
in  the  several  divisions  of  the  King’s  army,  in  houses, in  trees, 
in  hills  nud  in  house  hold  utensils.  [*] 


43.  Kumula  Kota  is  a  comet  of  the  color  of  the  white 

water  lily.  It  appears  in  the  west  wirh  its  tail  pointing  to  the 
east  ard  is  visible  only  fora  night.  When  it  appears  there 
will  be  unprecedented  happiness  in  the  land  for  a  period  of 
ten  years,  it) 

44  Mani  Ketu  is  a  comet  which  appears  for  only  3  hours 
occasionally ;  it  possesses  an  invisible  disc  and  appears  in  tho 
West ;  its  tail  is  straight,  and  white  and  it  resembles  %  line  of 
milk  drawn  from  a  human  breasfc.(t) 

45.  There  will  be  happiness  in  the  land  from  the  very 
lime  of  its  appearance  for  four  and  a  half  months;  reptiles  and 
venomous  creatures  will  come  into  existence  (§) 

46.  Jala  Ketu  is  a  comet  which  appears  in  the  west 
with  a  raised  tail;  it  is  glossy,  when  it  appears  there  will  b  e 
prosperity  in  the  land  for  f)  months,  and  the  world  will  be  freed 
from  all  miseries. 

47.  Bhnva  Ketu  is  a  comet  visible  only  for  a  single 
vjjght  and  in  the  East,  possessing  a  small  disc;  it  is  glossy; 
tho  tail  is  bent  like  that  of  a  lion. 

48.  There  will  be  unprecedented  happiness  in  the  land 
for  as  many  mouths  ns  the  number  of  hours  for  which  it  con¬ 
tinues  to  be  visible;  if  it’ should  be  tearful  to  look  at  fatal 
diseases  will  afflict  mankind. 

*  According  to  Parueora  it  is  soon  iu  trees,  mountain  B, bamboos,  China 
rose,  reads,  implements  of  war,  jewels,  chariots,  elephants,  camels,  beds 
s  eats,  vessels  and  the  like.  The  number  of  these  Kotos  is  10,  21,  60,  Or  100 

*in  the  opinion  of  several  winters. 

+  Y  rid  ha  Gavira  says  that  this  happiness  cannot  ho  an  untnixed  one; 
according  to  him,  cometary  appearances  never  fail  to  produce  evils. 

$  This  and  several  other  comets  can  ho  very  well  identified  by  a  look 
h)io  the  Map  of  comets  published  by  Europeans. 

§  According  to  Pnrasars  if  tbo  comet  continue* *  to  be  visible  for  over 
3  hours  serpents,  mongooses  and  the  like  will  come  into  existence, 


mWAV  SAMHITA. 


Pad  in  a  Ketu  is  a  comet  white  like  the  stem  of  tl 
is.  If  it  appears  only  for  a  night  there  will  bo  joy  and 
happiness  in  the  land  for  7  years. 


50.  Avarta  Ketu  is  a  comet  of  a  red  color  ;  it  appears  \a 
the  West  at  midmight  with  its  tail  pointing  to  the  South  and 
it  is  glossy.  There  will  be  happiness  in  the  land  for  as 
many  months  as  the  number  of  Xsbanas  (Four  minutes)  for 


which  it  continues  to  be  visible. 


51.  Swmvarta  Ketu  is  a  comet  which  appease  in  the 
West  in  the  evening  with  a  tail  of  the  color  ot  smoke  and  cop¬ 
per,  extending  to  a  third  of  the  sky  and  resembling  the  sharp 
end  of  a  dagger  ;  it  is  fearful  to  look  at. 

52.  Princes  will  suffer  in  wars  for  us  many  years  as  die 
number  of  hours  for  which  it  contiuuos  to  be  visible.  Those 
pqysons  will  also  suffer  in  the  star  of  whose  nativity  the  comet 
appears. 


53.  Omitting  the  benefic  comets  wo  shall  proceed  to 
state  the  several  princes  who  will  perish  according  as  the 
malefic  comets  either  dim  with  their  tails  the  stars  of  the 
various  constellations  or  appoar  to  be  in  contact  with  the  same. 


54.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Asvini  should  be 
dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  cootact  with,  maleflo 
comets  the  ruler  of  Asmaka*  will  perish  ;  if  the  stars  of 
Bharani  should  be  so  dimmed  or  in  contact  with  malefic 
comets,  the  ruler  of  Kiratas  will  perish  ;  if  those  of  Krittika, 
the  ruler  of  Kalinga  will  perish  ;  and  if  those  of  llohiui,  the 
ruler  of  Suraseua  will  perish. 


55.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Miiga  Seersha 
should  be  dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact 
with  malefic  comets,  the  ruler  of  Aseenara  will  perish  ;  if 


*  Moao  of  ihofio  countries  have  been  already  explained.  Tho  rest 
wherever  they  can  bo  identified,  will  bo  explained  a«  we  proceed. 


10 


BfclHAT  SAMHJTA. 


utL 

.. _  of  Ardra,  the  ruler  of  tho  people  subsisting  by  trie 
products  of  water  will  perish;  if  those  of  Punarvnsu  the  ruler 
of  Asmaka  will  perish  ;  and  if  those  of  lhishy a  the  ruler  oi 
Mag&da  will  perish. 

56.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Aslesha  should 
bo  dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with 
malefic  comets,  the  ruler  of  Asika  will  parish  /  if  those  of 
Mugha,  the  ruler  of  Anga  will  perish  ;  if  those  of  Poorva 
phalguni,  the  ruler  of  Pandya  will  perish  ;  if  those  of 
Uttavaphalgunij  the  ruler  of  Oojein  r/ill  perish  ;  and  if  those 
of  Hosta,  tho  ruler  of  Dandaka*  will  polish. 

57.  If  tho  stars  of  tho  constellation  of  Chittra  should  hb 
dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  in  contact  with  malefic 
comets,  tho  ruler  of  the  Kurus  will  perish ;  if  those  of  Swati 
the  rulers  of  Cashmere  and  Camboja  will  perish. 


58,  If  tho  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Visukha  should  be 
dimmed  by  tho  tails  of  or  appear  to  be  iu  contact  with  tho 
malefic  comets,  the  rulers  of  Ikshwafcu  and  of  Alaka  will 
perish  >  if  those  of  Auuradha,  tho  ruler  of  Pnndra  will  perish  ; 
if  those  of  Jyeshta  the  chief  omperor  will  sailer. 


59.  If  the  stars  of  the  constellation  of  Mala  should  bo 
dimmed  by  tho  tails  of  or  appear  to  bo  in  contact  with  malefic 
comets,  tho  rulers  of  Andhra  and  of  Mathra  will  perish  ;  if 
those  of  Poorvashadha  the  ruler  of  Benares  will  perish  ;  if 
those  of  (J  ttarashadh  A,  the  rulers  of  Youdheyaka,  of  Arjuua- 
yana,  of  Sivi  and  of  Ckaitya  will  porish* 

60.  If  the  stars  of  tho  constellation  of  Sravana  should 
be  dimmed  by  the  tails  of  or  appear  to  bo  in  contact  with  the 
malefic  comets,  tho  ruler  of  ICekayn  will  perish;  if  those  of 
Dbanishta,  the  ruler  of  Pu  njab  will  perish  ;  if  those  of  Sataya 


•  Ottndaka  :  i  f*  mo  of  a  district  in  tho  I' 'khan  between  the  Kcrroftdo 
And  Godavori  rivors  which  in  tho  tiuio  of  IlaiiiftChftttdrft  wa a  B  forest  and 
lolobrattd  &a  a  place  of  pilgrimage. 


mituT  sAiiniTE* 


Warner  of  Cejdon  will  perish  ;  if  those  of  Poorvabhadra,  tiro 
ruler  of  Bengal  will  perish  •;  if  those  of  Uttarabhadrn,  tho 
ruler  of  Naimisha  will  perish  ,*  and  if  those  of  Revati,  tho 
ruler  of  Kirata  will  perish- 


61.  If  tho  tails  of  tho  comets  should  he  crossed  by  tho 
fall  of  meteors  there  will  bo  happiness  in  the  land  ;  if  thero 
should  bo  a  fall  of  rain  at  tho  time  of  the  appearance  of  a 
cornet  mankind  will  be  exceedingly  happy  ,•  but  tho  people  of 
Chola  and  of  Avagnna  as  well  as  the  white-men  and  infidels 


and  tho  Chinese  will  suffer- 


62,  Tho  rulers  of  tho  countries  to  which  the  bent  tails  of 
the  comets  point,  of  the  countries  in  tho  direction  of  which 
the  tails  of  the  comets  extend  and  of  tho  countries  correspond¬ 
ing  to  tho  several  constellations  (as  described  above)  with 
whose  stars  the  comets  might  appear  to  be  in  contact,  will 
triumph  over  their  enemies  and  be  happy.  . 


Note  : — Compare,  with  tho  above,  what  modern  science 
has  to  eny  on  the  subject  of  comets  : 

u  What  then  is  a  comet  according  to  tho  latest  scientific 
researches  ?  The  spectroscope  has  pretty  well  solved  the 
query.  It  consists,  first,  of  a  more  or  leas  solid  nucleus  on  fire, 
blft^ing  and  glowing  ;  second,  of  vast  masses  of  incandescent 
ga*,  constituting  the  luminous  head  ;  third,  solid  material?, 
constituting  the  tail,  which  are  ponderable,  which  reflect  the 
Sun’s  light  and  arc  carried  along  by  tho  influence  of  tho 
nucleus  ,*  fourth,  an  immense  prolongation  of  the  tail  in  tho 
nature  of  attenuated  volumes  of  gas.  The  solid  materials  of  a 
comet,  it  is  believed,  consist  of  atones  and  sand,  particles 
ground  by  ceaseless  attrition.  The  proof  of  this  is  the  con¬ 
cession  of  most  astronomers  that  meteoric  showers  are  shreds 
and  patches  of  cometic  matter,  dropped  from  the  tail,  and 
these  meteors  arc*  stones.  The  genesis  of  cornets  is  found  to 


,•  -  ■  ynwr,..,'  s 


BUT II AT  SAMHITA. 


[cir. 


in  the  explosion  of  planetary  bodies,  a  theory  not  ’without 
good  scientific  authority/* 

“  Arago  estimates  that  there  are  17,000,000  of  these  fiery 
wanderers  within  tho  orbit  of  Neptune,  and  Lambert  regards 
500,000,000  as  a  moderate  estimate  for  those  in  the  Solar 
System.  All  the  astronomers  agree  that,  they  are  scattered 
through  spaco  ns  profusely  as  the  fish  in  the  seas.  The  Orbit 
of  the  Earth  is  over- whelmed  in  a  fine  net  work  of  oometarv 


<SL 


1312 1  HAT  SAimiTA. 


fttl 

looked 


looked  like  clouds  ;  its 
its  crystals  looked  like  the 
serpents  bearing  gems  in  their 
thus  the  whole  sea  looked  like  tho  ^ 


(k  Hear  now  the  effects  of  the  heliacal  rising  of  Canopus, 
a  star  sacred  to  Agastya  who  suppressed  the  \  iudaya  moun¬ 
tains  whose  soaring  heights  obstructed  the  course  of  tho  Sun  / 
to  which  the  pictured  robes  of  the  Vidyndhara  females  loan¬ 
ing  for  support  on  their  lords’  arms  and  flying  aloft  in  the  sky 
formed  beautiful  flowing  flags  ;  whose  caves  were  the  abodes 
of  lions  which,  having  drunk  of  tho  perfumed  blood  of 
elephants  in  rut  had  their  mouths  covered  with  bees  that 
looked  like  so  many  black  flowers,  and  from  which  caves 
issued  rivers  ;  whoso  summits  appoaved  to  score  tho  starry 
vault  •  whose  rocks  were  full  of  buzzing  bees  scared  by  tho 
violent  pulling  of  flower  trees  b}’  wild  elephants  and  were  also 
the  abodes  of  hyenas,  of  bears,  of  tigers  and  of  monkeys  ; 
through  which  lay  the  secret  course  of  tho  Havi  which  ap¬ 
peared  to  embrace  its  bosom  with  tho  affection  of  a  mistress  ; 
and  in  whose  forests  dwelt  the  Devas  and  also  Brahtnin  ;o- 
cluscs,  some  subsisting  on  water,  some  on  roots,  some  on  tho 
air  and  some  altogether  without  food. 

7.  When  the  star  Canopus  reappears  after  its  conjunction 
with  the  Sun,  waters  muddled  by  their  contact  with  tho  earth 
will  resume  their  original  clearness  just  in  the  same  way  as 
the  minds  of  the  Sadhus  naturally  recover  their  original  purity 
after  contact  with  the  wicked.* 


8.  Tho  autumn  is  attended  by  tho  Chakravnkaf  on  both 
its  tides  (i.  o.,  beginning  anil  end)  ;  in  it  is  hoard  tho  music 
of  tho  swan  ;  and  its  opening  is  marked  by  tho  beautiful  red 


♦  Tho  rhetorical  }*?»n£y  w  this  stanza  consists  in  *  certain  &les?:o, 
(double  meaning)  contained  in  the  term  Ku  Samnyoya,  which  means  both 
contact  with  the  earth  and  contact  with  the  wicked, 

The  next  three  star  ve  describe  the  beauties  of  tho  autumn  which  com¬ 
mend  s  with  the  reappearance  of  Canopus. 

f  ChakraTaka  ;  the  ruddy  goes©  commonly  called  the  Brahmani  duck. 


WUIIA.T  SAMHfTA.  tcla 

•/;  in  nil  these  respects  the  season  resembles  a  woman  wi 
a  ;i  ;jiie  bosom,  sounding  jewels  and  betel  colored  mouth* 

9.  Again  in  the  season  of  autumn  will  be  found  t.1jic  blue 
and  .vliitn  lotus  growing  side  by  side,  hovered  over  by  beauti¬ 
ful  lines  of  bees,  tender  creepers  adding  beauty  to  the  scene; 
the  season  therefore  resembles  a  charming  woman  with  blue 
eyes,  fair  face,  black  hair  and  thin  brows. 

10.  As  if  to  view  the  beauty  of  the  pure  disc  of  her  lord 
the  Moon,  the  summer  lake  opens  at  night  her  rod  lotus  bads 
— her  eyes — of  soft  petals  in* which  lie  concealed  the  black  boo 
serving  as  the  pupil  of  the  eye. 

1 1.  The  Earth,  by  means  of  her  arms,  the  waves,  adorn* 
cd  by  t  he  lotus,  the  Swan,  tho  ruddy  goose  and  the  water- 
crow  appears  to  welcome  the  appearance  of  Agastya  with  her 
offerings  of  gems,  abundant  ilowers  end  fruits. 

1 2.  Tho  poisonous  and  hot  waters  poured  down  by  cloud** 
Covered  serpents  by  order  of  fmlra  become  pure  and  fit  for  uso 
on  the  reappearance  of  the  Star  Canopus- 

13.  The  yery  thought  (meditation)  of  tho  sag©  Agastya 
is  calculated  to  wash  off  one’s  sins  ;  his  praise  (worship)  must 
be  capable  of  doing  more.  For  tho  benefit,  therefore,  of 
princes,*  I  will  now  speak  of  the  rules  of  the  Arghyct  (offer¬ 
ing)  to  be  presented  tQ  A  gusty  a  as  stated  by  the  Kish  is. 

14.  The  time  of  reappearance  of  the  Star  Canopus  is 
different  in  different  places  ;  and  it  ia  for  tho  learned  Astro¬ 
nomer  to  ascertain  these  times  for  given  places.  In  the  Town 
of  Oojion  the  star  reappears  when  the  sun  just  begins  to  enter 
the  24th  degree  of  the  sign  Leo  t 

•  The*  commentator  adds  that  ih\*  offering  ia  equally  binding  on  all 
iron,  and  forma  part  oi  man's  Nityakarma.  Tfc  Vishnn  Rahasya  wo  find  Vishnu 
fiddtosamg.  A gastya  as  follows  ho  who  fails  to  worship  thee  by  tho  offering 
or  Argh  u  shall  i  so  in  rove  favor  tho  offsets  of  a  year's  PwMiy  i  karma  ;  ho 
Wh>;  worships  thaw  shall  enjoy  wealth  and  prosperity  in  Sweta  Dwipo  (Val- 

kunthfe.)  .  ,  _ 

f |,o.i  t  Tho  word  5r*  ho  toxt  is  Agatasya  Kenyam,  which  literally 
ru,riitrf  hoforo  tho  San  enters  the  sign  of  Virgo,  hut  which  tho  commentator 
fakes  to  mean  fcgring  in  Loo,  Vido  Koto  to  stanza  81, 


b fun  at  sAkniT.b 


When  the  darkness  of  the  night  should  just  begin 
broken  by  streaks  of  red  light  from  the  eastern  horizon, 
princes,  previously  prepared*  for  the  piirpose,  ought  to 
offer  their  Argbjam  to  Agastya  by  pouring  it  on  the  earth  in 
tho  direct  ion  of  the  Star  Canopus  rising  in  the  South  East 
will  bo  pointed  out  by  the  Astronomer. 

10.  The  offering  to  bo  made  by  princes  in  honor  of 


Agastya  shall  Consist  of  tho  fragrant  iiowers  of  tho  season, 
of  fruits,  of  precious  stones,  of  gold  cloths,  of  cows,  of  bulls, 
of  well  cooked  rice,  of  sweet-meats,  of  curdled  milk,  of  colored 
rico,  of  perfumed  smoko  aud  fragrant  paste. 


17.  A  prince  making  this  offering,  with  a  truly  devout 
spirit,  on  every  occasion  of  the  reappearance  of  the  Star 
Canopus  for  7  years  will  be  freod  from  disease,  wilt  triumph 
over  bis  enemies,  and  will  become  tho  Solo  ruler  of  the  E*u  th* 

18.  A  Brahmin  making  this  offering  to  the  extent  of  na 
ability  will  become  learned  in  tho  Vedas  and  will  bo  blessed 
with  a  wife  and  children  ;  a  Vaisia  doing  the  same  will  get 
cows  ;  and  a  Sudra  doing  it  will  get  wealth,  and  all  the  four 
will  bo  freod  from  disease  and  become  virtuous.t 


19.  If  the  disc  of  the  Star  Canopus  should  present  a  dis¬ 
agreeable  appearance,  there  will  bo  disease  in  tho  land  ;  if 
yellow  there  will  be  drought ;  if  of  the  color  of  smoke-  cows 
will  suffer  ;  if  of  unsteady  light  mankind  will  bo  afflicted  with 
fears  ;  if  white  red  they  will  suffer  from  hunger  and  from  star¬ 
vation  ;  and  if  of  very  small  disc  tho  chief  Towns  will  be  sur¬ 
rounded  by  the  enemy- 


*  Previously  prepared  :  by  faating  and  performance  of  Agastya 
pooja,  according  to  commentator, 

f  According  to  Mateyupurann,  tho  offering  must  be  made  7  times  cn 
some  one  morning  before  dawn  within  7  days  from  tho  reappearance .of  Cano¬ 
pus.  According  to  some  other  authority  tho  offering  should  bo  continued  tor 
17  years,  and  mutt  bo  accompanied  in  the  caao  of  tho  first  three  clatae*  o» 
men  by  the  singing  ot  Vodic  hymna.  For  a  detailed  account  of  tho  ritual  con¬ 
nected  with  the  ceremony  tho  roller  is  referred  to  Bhavisbyapuratia  and 
to  a  work  entitled  Pauamaia, 


TUCT  VI  AT  SAM  HIT  A. 


C(S[ 

sUver.kJULi 


It  Canopus  should  appear' of  the  color  of  silver 
h1*  or  brilliant  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land,  and 
mankind  will  be  free  from  fear  and  disease. 


21.  If  Canopus  should  be  crossed  by  motoric  falls  or  by 
comets  mankind  >vill  suffer  from  hunger  and  death*  When 
the  sun  enters  the  Constellation  of  lliistn,  Canopus  re-ap- 
pears,  and  when  he  enters  the  coustellatiou  of  Itohini,  Canopus 
disappears** 


CHARTER  XIII. 

On  the  Ursa  Major, 


or 

TllE  CoNSTEfXATlQN  of  Sapta  Rishis. 

1.  The  Seven  Rishis  form  as  it  were  a  garland  of  the 
whit<  lotus  to  lady  North  or  look  like  box  smile  or  seem  to  be 
her  lords. 

2.  Or  by  the  direction  of  her  lord  the  Role  star,  lady 
North,  appears  to  dance  round  as  the  Soveu  liistua  move  in 
tholr  courso*  1  begin  to  treat  of  these  stars  adopting  the 
views  of  Vridha  Garga. 

3.  During  the  reign  of  Yudhishtiinf  2520J  years  be- 

*  Tho  statement  in  the  text  amounts  to  this  :  Canopus  re appears 
when  iho  sun  enters  the  37th  degree  of  the  sign  Virgo,  and  disappears  when 
the  sun  cti tors  tho  11th  degree  of  the  sign  Taurus.  This  the  commentator 
says  cam  not  lie  ordinarily ,  and  is  besides  opposed  to  what  has  boon  stated  in 
Stan T.ft  14  th.  According  to  commentator  the  author  has  quoted  in  the  last 
stansa  tho  opinion  of  Parasara  which  is  only  an  instance  cf  Utpata.  It 
cannot  be  otherwise  ;  for  can  opt) a  is  sitnatod  at  the  end  of  tho  sign  Gemini 
w  hich  in  70°  from  Hasta  and  only  50°  from  RoVdni  :  — 

According  to  some  canopna  reappears  on  the  Sfch  InnAr  day  or  on  new- 
moonday  of  the  waning  moon  of  the  month  of  Asvaynk  (Tula  and  Vriscbika^f. 
This  is  opposed  to  actual  observation  and  must  ho  regarded  as  TJtpata. 

Again  in  Vishnu  Hahasya  Vactmna  it  is  stated  that  canopUB  reappears 
when  the  San  enters  Ilnsta  ;  brfc  this  as  well  as  what  Brihaspati  says,  the 
commentator  regards  as  being  truo  for  the  Northern  countries* 

t  Yodhishtira,  otherwise  known  ns  Dharmaputra,  the  eldest  of  the 
Pa&duft  who  nourished  at  the  end  of  the  JHnparayiiga. 

X  2620,  i.  e.  nearly  4,500  years  ago  Tho  reader  will  note  that  at  this 
early  period  at  lease,  if  not  earlier  still,  the  Hindis  were  noted  for  their 
know 'odg©  >f  Astronomy  and  that  they  had  recognised  tho  motions^of  the 
lava,  speaks  highly  of  their  powers  of  observation. 


BUI  BAT  BAHHITA- 

commencement  of  Vikrama  Sakn  tlio  Seven 

•*>**!/ 

at  the  constellation  of  Alagha  (Rogu)us).* * * § 

4.  Tho  Rishis  take  a  period  of  100  years  to  go  over  oacli 
of  the  27  Asterisms.t  They  rise  in  tho  North  East  and 
are  accompanied  by  the  chaste  Arundhanti,  tho  consort  of 
Vasishtha.J 

5.  The  eastern  most  of  the  group  is  Bhagavan  Maricbi  ; 
the  next  to  him  is  Vasishiha  ;  tho  next  is  Angin^a  and  tho 
next  two  are  Afcri  and  Pulastj'a. 

6.  Tho  nest  iu  order  are  tho  Rishis  Pulaha  and  Kritu- 
.  Tho  Chaste  Arundhati  closely  attends  her  husband  the  sago 

Vasishtha.J} 

7.  If  the  Rishis  should  be  crossed  by  meteoric  falls, 
thunderbolts,  or  comets,  or  if  they  should  appear  dim  or  with¬ 
out  rays  or  of  very  small  disc,  they  will  cause  misery  and 
suffering  to  tho  persons  and  objects  they  severally  represent  ; 
but  if  they  should  appear  big  or  bright  there  will  bo  happi¬ 
ness  and  prosperity. 

8.  If  Marichi  should  bo  affected  as  described  above  the 
Gundharvas,  the  Devas,  the  Asuras,  skilled  magicians  and 
physicians,  tho  Yakshas,  the  Nogas  and  tho  Vidyadharaa  will 
also  be  afflicted, 

9.  If  Vashhtha  should  bo  crossed  by  meteoric  falls  or 
otherwise  affected,  the  Scythians,  the  Yavanas,  tho  Dnradas, 

*  Regnlus  :  vido  last  noto  to  tho  next  stanza. 

t  An  As  to  riant  in  J3  .  20*  of  the  ecliptic  :  fife  the  ate  of  100  yean* 
each  tho  Rishis  tako  2,700  ye^rs  to  make  a  circuit  of  tho  heavens, 

|  Tho  Rishis  are  said  to  bo  in  that  constellation  of  tho  ecliptic  with 
which  the  western  most  two  either  rho  at  Lanka  (equator)  or  culminate  at 
the  meridian,  In  Vishnu  PrjraiiA  it  is  staged  that  when  the  observation  was 
made  at  one  tinno,  the  two  Rish  i«  wero  found  in  Magha.  Tho  Purar-a  also 
State3  that  when  tho  Rishis  ahon Id  reach  the  constellation  of  Fo<  rvashacIf.a 
passing  over  a  space  of  10  astorisms  in  1015  years  the  Nandaa  will  roigu. 

§  Vasishtha,  as  ulready  observed,  is  tho  last  alar  but  ono.  Wbai  is 
pointed  out  m  Arundhati  near  Vasiahtha  is  not  tho  -ml  Arundhati  ;  she  is 
declared  in  the  Sastms  to  ho  a  Sookfih mu  Tam  (telescopic  star)  very  close  to 
Vasiahthi*. 


n 


1 


TUUTIAT  ftAMHJTA. 


[cn- 


v„  .  aratns,  tlio  people  of  Cumboja  and  tho  llishis  ol  tiro 
Swts  will  ,-uffer  ;  hot  if  Vasishtha  should  appear  bright,  lie 
will  cause  happiness. 

10.  If  Angiras  should  be  affected  as  described  above, 
roou  of  knowledge,  men  of  acute  intellect  and  the  Brahmins 
will  be  afflicted  ;  if  Atri  should  lie  so  affected  the  products  of 
the  forests  and  of  water,  seas,  and  rivers  will  suffer. 

11.  Along  with  Pulastya  will  suffor  the  Ilakshasns,  the 
Pisachaa,  the  Asuras,  the  Deityas  and  the  Kagas-  ^  Along  with 
1’nlaha  will  suffer  roots  aud  fruits,  and  along  with  ICritu  will 
<:  u tier  sacrificial  rites  and  persons  performing  them. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Oh  Kuhma  Vibhaoa-* 

] .  The  countries  of  the  Earth  beginning  from  the  centro 

of  Bharata  Varsha  and  going  round - tlio  East,  South 

East,  South,  &c.,— - are  divided  into  9  divisions  corres¬ 

ponding  to  the  27  lunar  asterisms  at  the  rate  of  8  for  each 
division  and  beginning  from  Krifctika. 

2-  Tho  Constellations  of  Krittika,  Rohini  and  Mriga- 
Boorsha  represent  tho  Madhyadosa  or  central  division  consis¬ 
ting  of  the  countries  of  Bhadra,  Arimeda,  Mandavya,  Salwa, 
Nor  pa,  Bjph&nn,  Mani,  Vatsa,  Ghosha,  the  countries  border¬ 
ing  ou  the  Jumna  and  tho  Sarswati,  tho  countries  of  Matsya, 
Mndliyamika. 

3.  Madhnmka,  Upajyotishaka,  Dharmnrani,  Surasona, 
Coumgreevn,  Uddehika,  Panda,  Guda,  Asvattha,  Panchala. 


AM,]  BfilUAT  HAMHITA.  I 

‘'Jjp.  Sakcta,  Kauku,  Kuru,  KalakOti,  Kukura  tho  Pariy 
din  tains,  Oudumbara,  Kapiahthala,  Gajahvaya. 


5.  Tho  constellations  of  Ardra,  Punarvasu  and  Pushya 
represent  tho  Eastern  division’eoiisisting.  of  the  mountains  of 
Anjaaa,  of  Vmhabha,  of  Dhvaja,  of  Padrna,  and  of  Malyavan  ; 
the  countries  of  Vynglmimukha,  Suhma,  Karvata,  Chan¬ 
dra  pur  a,  Soorpakarna* 


6.  Khasa,  Magada,  Sibiragiri,  Mifchila,  Samatata,  Udra, 
Asvavaclana,  Danturaka,  and,  farther-east  tfyotiaha,  Louhibya, 
Kshirasaixmdra,  tho  land  of  tho  Canibals, 

7.  The  Eastern  Ghauts,  tho  countries  of  Bhadragondaka, 
Poundra,  Utkala,  Ivasee,  Mekala/  (Jmbashta,  Yekapado, 
Tamraliptika,  Kosalaka  and  Vardhumana, 

8.  The  eonstollationa  of  Aslesha,,  Magha  and  Poorva- 
phalguni  represent  tho  South  Eastern  division  consisting  of 
tho  countries  of  Kosala,  Kali.nga,  Vanga,  Upavnnga,  Jataranga 
Soulika,  Vidarhha,  Vatsa,  Andbra,  Chedika,  Oordhvakanthau 


9.  TI10  islands  of  Vrisha,  of  Nalikera  and  of  Charma  ; 
tho  countrios  of  Vidarbharaga  and  other  countries  in  tho 
Vindaya  mountains,  of  Tripuri,  Smasrudhara,  TIemakuta, 
Vyalagriva,  Mahagriva, 

10.  Kishkindha,  Kanfcakasthala,  Nishda,  Purika,  Dasarna 
Nagna,  Parna  and  Sahara. 

11.  The  constellations  of  Uttaraphalguni,  Haata  and 
Chitra  represent  tho  Southern  division  consisting  of  tho  coun¬ 
tries  of  Ceylon,  Kalanjana,  Sourikirna,  Talikata,  the  moun¬ 
tains  of  Giri,  Nagara,  Malaya,  Dardnra,  Mahondra  and 
Malinya  and  the  countries  of  Broach, 

12.  Kunkata,  Tunkana,  Vaoavasi,  Sibilsa,  Phanikara, 
Konkana,  Abhira,  Akara>  tho  river  Vena,  the  countries  of 
Avanti,  Dasapura,  Gonarda,  Kerala, 

13.  And  Carnat-a  ;  tho  forest  of  Mahatnvi,  the  mountain 
of  Chitrakuta,  tho  countries  of  Nasikya,  Kolia,  Giri>  Chola 


HIU HAT  SA’MniTA* 


inckadvipa  and  Jatadhara,  tho  river  Cauvery  and  tuo 
mountain  of  Rasy  am  uk  a. 


14.  The  islands  of  Vyduryadvipa,  Sankhadvipft,  Mukta- 
dvipa,  Trivaricharadvipa  and  Dliunnapattanadvipa  ;  the  coun¬ 
tries,  of  Ganarajya,  of  Kristna,  Chellur,  the  Sika,  Surpa  and 
Kusumanaga  mountains, 


15.  The  forest  of  Tumbavana,  tho  country  of  Karmane- 
yaka,  the  South  sea,  tho  countries  of  Tapasasraraa,  Rishika, 
Kanchi,  Maruchi,  P&fctana,  Cherya,  Arya,  Simlmla,  Rishabha, 

16.  The  Town  of  Bakuleva,  tho  forest  of  Dandaka,  tho 
countries  of  Temingilasana,  Bhadra,  Kachha,  Kunjaradhari 
and  Tamraparni. 

17.  The  constellations  of  Swati,  Yisakha  and  Anuradha 
represent  the  South-Western  division  consisting  of  the  coun¬ 
tries  of  Palhava,  Camboja,  Sindh,  Souvira,  Badavamukha, 
Arava,  Ambushfcha,  Kapila,  Narunukha,  Auarta, 

IS.  Phenagiri,  Yavana,  Makara,  Karnapraveya,  Para- 
i>aka,  Sudra,  Barbara,  Kirata,  Khanda,  Kravya,  Asia,  Abhira, 
Ckanchuka, 


19.  Hemagiri,  Sindhukaluka,  Ruivataka,  Surashtra 
Badara,  Dravida  and  Maharnava. 

20.  The  constellations  of  Jeyashta,Mula,  and  Poorvashadlia 
represent  the  Western  division  consisting  of  the  fivo  moun¬ 
tains  ol  Maniman,  Megliavau,  Vanougha,  Kshnrarpan  and 
Astagiri- and  the  countries  of  Aparantuka,  Santika,  Haikaya, 
Prasastadri,  Vokkaua, 

21.  Punjab,  Ramatha,  Parata,  Tarakashiti,  Jringa, 
Vaisya,  Kanaka,  Saka  and  the  rude  Mlecha  countries  iu  the 

W«3St. 

22.  Tho  constellations  of  Uttirashadha,  Sravana,  and 
Sravishta  represent,  the  north  western  division  consisting  of 
tho  countries  of  Mandavya,  Tukhara,  Talahala,  Madra,  As- 
maka,  Kuluta,  Lahada..  Stirnjya,  Nrisimha,  Yauakha, 


liBIifAT  SAMIIXTA. 


The  rivers  tho  Venum&ti,  tho  Palguluka  and  f  tl 
uha,  and  the  countries  of  Marukachha  and  Charm  aranga 
whose  people  possess  a  single  oye,  single  lock,  a  long  neck, 
a  long  face  and  long  hair. 

24,  Tho  contellufcions  of  Satabhisliak,  Purva  Bhadrapada, 
Uttara  libadrapada  represent  tho  Northern  division  consisting 
of  tho  six  mountains  of  the  Kydasa,  the  Himalayas,  the  Vasu- 
mau,  tho  Dhanudirnau,  the  Krouticlia  and  the  Mom  and  tho 
countries  of  the  North  Ivurudosa,  Kslmdrameerm, 

25.  Knikaya,  Vasati,  Yamuna,  Bliogaprastha,  Arjuna- 
yana,  Agindhara,  Ad arsan tadvipi ,  Trigarta,  Turaganana,  A s- 
wamukha, 

20.  Kesodbara,  Chipiba,  Nasika,  Daseraka,  Vatadhana, 
Saradhana,  Takshusila,  Pashka!  a  vata,  Kailavata,  Kuntadhana, 


27.  Arabara,  Madraku,  Malava,  Pourava,  Kachara,  Dai  - 
dapingala,  Manuhala,  Kuna,  Kolmla,  Seetaka,  Jlandavya,  BLu- 
iapura, 


28.  Gandbara,  Yasovati,  Hematala,  Ilajanya,  Khachara, 
Gavya,  Yondheya,  Dasameya,  Syainaka,  and  Kshemadhurta. 

29.  The  constellations  of  llevafci,  Asvati  and  Bharani 
represent  tho  North-Eastern  Division  consisting  of  the  coun¬ 
tries  of  Morukanaka,  Nashturajya,  Pasupala,  Kocra,  Kasmira, 
Abhisara,  Darada,  Tangana,  Kuiuta,  Tairindha,  Vanarashtra, 


SO.  Brihmapura,  Darvatla,  A  mar  a,  Vanarajya,  Kirata, 
Chino,  Kouninda,  Bhalla,  Palola,  Jatasura,*Kunatha,  Khasha, 
Ghoslia,  Kuchitra, 

81.  Yekacharana,  Anuvisva,  Ruvarnablm,  Vasnvana, 
Divishta,  Pourava,  Chiranivasana,  Trinetra,  Munjadri  and 
Gondharva. 

82.  If  the  nine  divisions  of  tho  27  constellations  from 
Krittika  should  suffer  from  tho  presence  of  malefic  planets# 
in  them,  the  rulers  of  Panchala,  Magada,  Kalinga, 


*  These  aro  tho  Batam,  tho  Sun,  Mars,  Kahu  and  Ketu  according  to 
commentator. 


HKUIAT  SAMTIITA. 


3.  Avanti,  Anarta,  Sindh,  Souvira,  Harahoura 
\i  Kouninda  will  respectively  suffer  miseries.  - 


[en^ij.y 

MaSULi 


Note.— The  following  list  is  from  Perasara- 
Tho  chief  mountains  are  7.  The  chief  rivers  are  40.  The 
chief  oceans  are  4.  The  number  of  smaller  rivers  flowing  into 
seas  is  G,00>>. 

Tho  chief  countries  nro  99.  Tho  number  of  peninsulas 
is  10;  of  Bandy  deserts  is  8  ;  of  deep  lakos  80;  of  islands  £0, 
The  number  of  rivers  whoso  courso  is  westwards  is  5,000- 

According  to  Vikvama  Siraha  the  throe  constellations 
from  Krittika  form  tho  womb,  tho  Naval  and  tho  heart  of 
lunar  Zodiac  ;  tho  three  from  An  dr  a  form  the  neck,  faco  and 
so  forth  going  round  as  before,  so  that  Outlh,  Mithila,  Kon- 
liki,  Gaya,  Patna,  Apichatra  as  far  as  Allahabad  are  in  the 
womb  of  the  lunar  Zodiac  ;  Bengal,  Utkala,  Kelinga  and 
Magada  are  in  the  Lead  ;  Vcngi,  and  Konsala  aro  in  the  right 
foot;  Simhaln,  Malaya  Kauchi  and  Kishkinda  are  in  the  right 
side  ;  Kadi  mere  is  in  the  left  side,  Kuru,  Nepala  and  China  aro 
in  tho  left  foot. 


PRIHAT  KAMTHTA.  [Olt. 

CH  AFTER, — XV* 

On  the  Nakshatbas. 

1.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Krittika  will 
delight  in  white  flowers,  will  perform  sacrificial  rites,  will  be 
skilled  magicians  and  metaphysicians,  will  bo  Aggers,  bar- 
bora,  Brahmans,  potters,  priests  or  astromors.* 

2.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Robin i  will 
bo  devout  men,  merchants,  rulers,  rich  men,  Yogis,  drivers, 
or  men  possessed  of  cows,  cattle  and  the  animals  of  water, 
farmors  and  mon  possessed  of  wealth  derived  from  mountain 
produce. 

3.  Those  who  aro  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Mrigasira 
will  delight  or  deal  in  perfumes,  dross,  pearls,  flowers,  fruits 
precious  stones,  wild  boasts,  birds  and  deer  j  will  bo  Soraayajis 
or  singers  ;  will  bo  lascivious  ;  will  be  good  writers  or  pain¬ 
ters. 

4.  Those  who  aro  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Ardra  will 
delight  in  killing,  torturing,  lying,  in  adultery,  thieviug, 
cheating  and  tale-bearing;  will  deal  in  pod  grains,  black 
magio,  sorcery  and  exorcism. 

5-  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Punarvasu 
will  bo  noted  for  truthfulness,  generosity,  cleanliness,  respect¬ 
able  decent,  personal  beauty,  sense,  fame  and  wealth  •  they 
will  also  be  merchants,  dealing  in  excellent  articles,  will  be 
fond  of  service  and  will  delight  in  the  company  of  painters 
and  sculptors. 

G.  Those  who  are  born  on  tho  lunar  day  of  Pushy  a  will 
be  dealers  in  barley,  wheat,  rice,  sugnr-canes  and  in  the  produce 
of  the  forest;  will  be  either  ministers  or  rulers  ;  will  live  by 
water  ;  will  bo  sadhus  and  will  delight  in  sacrificial  rites. 

♦  Of  course  ono  and  tho  same  person  comiofc  bo  all  those  ;  though 
serera!  charactors  might  belong  to  him. 


mww  motita. 

Those  who  arc  bom  on:  the  lunar  day  ofjAslcaha,  wk 
dealers  in  perfumes,  roots,  fruits,  reptiles,  serpents  and 
poison;  will  delight  in  cheating  others  of  their  property ; 
will  bo  dealers  in  pod  grains ;  and  will  be  skilled  in  raedicitm 
of  every  sort, 

8.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Magha  will 
be  possessed  of  wealth,  grains  aud  store* houses  ;  will  delight 
in  frequenting  hills  and  in  the  performance  of  religious  rites  ; 
will  bo  merchants ;  will  be  valient;  will  take  animal  food  and 
will  be  female  halers. 

9.  Those  who  are  bom  on  the  lunar  day  of  P.  Phalguni 
will  delight  in  dance,. .in  young  women,  in  music,  ia  painting, 
m  sculpture  and  in  trade;  will  be  dealers  in  cotton,  salt,  honey 
and  oil  and  will  be  for  ever  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  vigor  of 
youth. 

10.  Those  who.  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  U.  Thalguir 
will  bo  mild,  cleanly,  modest,'  heretical,  generous  and  learned  ; 
will  be  dealers  ingrains;  will  be  wealthy,  virtu  ms  and  in  the 
company  of  princes. 

11.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Hasta  will 
be  thieves,  dealers  in  elephants,  charioteers,  chief  ministers, 
painters,  merchants  and  dealers  in  pod  grains;  learned  in  the 
Sastras  and  of  bright  appearance. 

12.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Chitra  will 
be  dealers  in  jewels,  precious  stones,  fine  cloths,  writers  and 
singers,  manufacturers  of  perfumes,  good  mathematicians 
weavers,  surgeons,  oculists  and  dealers  in  Rajadhanya- » 

13.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  clay  of  Svati  will 
delight  in  keeping  birds,  deer,  horses ;  will  be  grain  mer¬ 
chants;  dealers  in  beans  ;  of  weak  friendship ;  weak,  of 
abstemious  habits  and  skilled  tradesmen. 


*  Ra}adhauyri. ;  a  kind  of  rice— Fanicjnm  Frumautacoam,  known  ia  T&tnit 


urihat  samhita. 


[o: 


Those  who  arc  born  on  the  Itfnar  day  of  Visakhn 
will  grow  trees  yielding  red  flowers  and  red  fruits  ;  be  dealers 
in  gingelly  seed?,  beans,  cotton,  black  gram  and  chick  peas 
and  worshippers  of  Indra  and  A  gni. 


15.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Anaradha 
will  bo  valient  ;  heads  of  parties  ;  fond  of  the  Company 
of  Sad  1ms.  keep  vehicles  and  grow  every  species  of  crop. 

16-  Those  who  are  horn  on  lunar  day  of  Jeyslita  will  be 
valiant,  of  good  descent,  wealthy,  famous  ;  disposed  to  cheat 
Others  of  their  property,  fond  of  travelling,  rulers  of  provinces 
or  commanders  of  armies. 


17.  Those  who  are  boro  on  the  lunar  day  of  Moola  will 
be  druggists,  heads  of  men,  dealers  in  flowers,  roots,  fruits 
and  seeds  ;  will  bo  rich  and  will  delight  in  garden  work. 


18.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  P.  Asliadha 
will  be  of  gentle  manners;  fond  of  sea-voyage,  truthful,  cleanly 
and  wealthy  ;  will  delight  in  earth  work  ;  will  be  boatmen  ,* 
will  be  dealers  in  fruits  and  flowers  of  water* 


19*  Thoso  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  U.  Asliadha 
will  be  chief  ministers  or  wrestlers  ;  will  keep  elephants  and 
horses,  will  be  religious  ;  will  bo  men  of  principle  ;  soldiers  ; 
happy  and  of  bright  appearance* 

20.  Thoso  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Sravana 
will  bo  enuning,  of  active  habits,  efficient  workmen,  bold, 
virtuous,  god-fearing  and  truthful. 

21.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Sravishta 
will  bo  shameless,  of  weak  friendship,  haters  of  women, 
generous,  rich  and  free  from  temptation. 

:?2.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  Satabhinhak 
will  be  fishermen  or  dealers  in  fish  and  hogs ;  washermen  ; 
dealers  in  wine  and  birds. 

2o.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  P.  Bhadra- 
pada  will  be  thieves,  shepherds,  torturers  ;  wicked,  mean,  and 


Ekj  JM’JHAT  BAMJUTA* 

'coif  fal  ;  will]  possess  no  virtues  ;  will  neglect  religi 
xit qb  and  will  bo  successful  in  fight. 

24.  Those  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  U,  Bliadra- 
puda  will  bo  Brahmins*  performers  of  sacrificial  rights ;  will 
he  generous,  devout,  rich  and  observant  of  the  rules  of  the 
holy  orders  ,*  will  bo  heretics,  rulers,  dealers  in  rice. 

25.  Those  who  are  bora  on  the  lunar  clay  of  Revati  will 
be  dealers  in  water  flowers,  salt,  gems,  conch  shells,  p|arls, 
creatures  of  water,  pregnant  dowers  and  perfumes  >  they  in  ay 
also  bo  boat-men. 


26.  Thvse  who  are  born  on  the  lunar  day  of  As  want  will 
keep  horses,  will  be  commanders  of  army  ;  physicians,  ser*  j 
vauts,  dealers  in  horse,  riders,  tradesmeu  or  masters  of  horses. 

27-  Thoso  who  are  bom  on  the  lunar  day  of  Btiurimi 
will  deal  in  precious  stones,  will  be  flesh  eaters,  will  be  wick¬ 
ed  men  ;  will  delight  in  acts  of  killing  and  torturing  ;  will  bo 
dealers  in  pod  grains  ;  will  be  of  low  descent  or  weak  minded. 

28.  The  constellations  of  P.  Phalgu  ni,  P.  A  shad  ha,  P. 
Bhadrapada  and  Krifctika  belong  to  the  Brahmin  class  *  tlio^o 
of  Pu  bya,  U‘  Phalguni,  TJ-  Ashadha  and  U.  Bhadrapada  belong 
to  the  Kshatriya  class  ;  those  of  Revati,  Ann  rad  ha,  Mag  ha 
and  Rohiui  belong  to  the  Sudra  class,. 


29.  The  constellations  of  Punarvasu,  TTasta,  Abhij.it  and 
Aswini  belong  to  the  Taisya  class  ;  those  of  Mttla,  Ardra, 
Swati  and  Sii.tabhi.shat  belong  to  the  butcher  class. 

30  Tho  constellations  of  Mrigaseersha,  Jy eshtn,  Cbittra 
and  Savishta  belong  to  the  serving  class  ;  those  of  Astesha, 
Visal* ha,  Sravana  aud  Bharani  belong  to  the  lowest  or  Chan- 
dala  class. 

ol.  That  constellation  in  which  the  Sun  and  the  Saturn 
might  happen  to  bo  together  or  through  which  Mars  might 
happen  to  pass  or  in  which  the  retrograde  motion  of  a  planet 
might  lio  or  in  which  a  lunar  or  solar  eclipse  might  take 
place  or  through  which  the  moon  might  pass. 


jmiHAT  SAMHTTA' 


Will,  bring  misery  to  the  persons  and  objects 
^^^ents.  If  on  the  other  band  the  constellation  should  be 
free  from  any  such  affection  the  same  persons  and  objects  will 


prosper. 


CHAPTER.— XVI 


On  the  Planets. 

J.  The  sun  presides  over  tbe  people  of  the  Western  half 
of  the  Nerbada,  of  the  countries  on  both  banks  of  the  Some* 
of  Orissa,  Bengal?  Suhma,  Kalingca,  Balhika,  Saka,  Yavana, 
Magada,  Sahara*  Eastern  parts  of  Jotisbapura,  China  and 
Cainboja. 

2‘  Over  the  people  of  Mekala,Kiratn,  Vitaka,  the  outer 
and  inner  mountains,  Pulinda.  the  eastern  half  of  Dravida  and 
the  east  bank  of  the  Jmnna. 

3.  Over  the  people  of  tho  Chum  pa  city,  the  Udunxbaras, 
the  citizens  of  Kousambi,  of  Cbedi,  of  Kalinga  in  tho  forest 

s  of  the  Yind&yn  mountains,  of  Pnndra,  of  Golangula,  of  Sri- 
parvata  and  of  the  town  of  Vardhamana  ; 

4.  And  over  tho  people  liv  ing  on  tho  banks  of  the  Iks- 
humatb  He  also  presides  over  hill  mon,  quick-silver,  deserts, 
shepherds,  seeds,  pod  grains,  bitter  Havor»  trees,  gold,  fire* 
poison,  persons  successful  in  battle. 

5>  Over  medicines,  physicians,  quadrupeds,  fanners, 
kings,  butchors,  travellers,  thieves,  serpents,  forests  and  re* 

* 

nowned  and  cruel  men. 


6.  The  Moon  presides  over  citadels  fortified  by  hills  or 
by  water,  over  Oudb,  Broach,  the  sea/  the  city  of  Romo,  the 
country  of  Tukhara,  dwellers  in  forests,  the  islands  of  Tanka- 
na,  Hala  and  Strirajya  in  the  big  seas. 

7.  She  presides  over  sweet  juice,  flowers*  fruits,  water, 
salt,  gems,  conch  shells,  pearls,’* creatures  of  water,  paddy, 
barley,  medicinal  plants*  wheat,  Somayajis,  kings  attacked  in 
the  rear,  and  Brahmins. 


BttUiAT  BAM  FI' 'A- 


8;  She  also  presides  over  line,  white  horses,  cbarmih 
*  young  women,  commanders  of  armies,  articles  of  food,  cloiherv. 
horued  animals,,  the  liakshasas, -fanners  and  sroutiw.* 

0.  Mars  presides  over  tho  people  residing  in  the  west 
half  of  the  countries  on  "both  banks  of  the  Sonne,  tlve  Nevbada 
and  the  Boas ;  over  those  residing  on  the  banks  of  the  Kii  - 
vindhya,  the  Vetravabi,  the  Sipta,  the  Godavary  and  the 
Vena. 


10-  The  Ganges,  the  Pioshui,  the  MalianaiH,  the  Iudus, 
the  Malabi  and  the  Para  ;  he  also  presides  over  the  country 
of  Uttara  Pandya,  the  Mahon  dra,  the  \r  inday  a  and  tho  Malaya 
mountains  and  tho  Choladesa. 


11.  The  Dravidas,  the  Vidohas,  tho  Andhras,  the  As- 
makaa,  tho  Bhasnpurus,  the  Koimkanas,  the  MantrishikaSj  the 
Kuntalas,  tho  Keralas,  the  Oatulakas,  the  Kanfcipuras,  the 
Mlochas  and  the  mixed  races. 


12.  He  a!  >  presides  ovor  JSfassIk,  Bhogavardhaua,  Vi. 
rata,  tho  countries  bordering  on  theVindaya  mountains  find 
over^tho  people  living  on  the  bunks  of  the  Tapfci  and  the 
G  umfcee. 


IB.  He  presides  over  citizens,  farmers,  chemists,  fireman, 
soldiers,  forest  men,  citadels,  chief  townB,  butchers,  sinners? 
haughty  men ; 

14.  Kings,  children,  elephants,  fops,  infanticides,  shep¬ 
herds,  red  fruits,  red  flowers,  corals,  commanders  of  armies 
jaggery,  wine  and  cruel  men  ; 


15.  Over  store  houses,  Agniboiries,  metal  mines,  tho 
Sakhyas  in  red  robes  ,  the  Budhists,  thieves,  rogues,  persons 
harboring  (leap  hatred  and  glntfcons, 

ifi,  Mercury  presides  ovor  the  western  half  of  the  Loa- 
bitya  river,  tho  Indus,  the  Gogra,  tho  Gambhiraka,  the  Batha, 


*  Sronty,  a  person  skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  rales  relating 
to  sacrificial  rites. 


BIOTAT  SAMlUTA- 


B  i  rH AT  SAM1UTA-  [CH 

Ganges  and  its  tributary  the  Kousi.  Ho  also  presi 
over  the  countries  of  Videha,  and  Cainboja  ; 


I  7.  Tho  eastern  half  of  Muttra,  the  .Himalayas,  the  Go- 
manta  and  the  Chitrakufca  mountains,  Surat,-  popte  living  on 
table  lands,  on  the  surface  of  water,  in  valleys  and  iu  moun¬ 
tains  ; 


18.  Over  persona  possessing  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of 
drink,  of  mechanics,  of  music,  of  writing,  of  gems,  of  color 
and  of  perfumes ;  be  also  presides  over  paiutors,  gramma¬ 
rians,  mathematicians,  physicians,  sculptors  ; 

It).  Spies,  jugglers,  infants,  poets,  rogues,  tale  bearers, 
black-magicians,  messengers,  hermaphrodites,  buffoon*,  sor¬ 
cerers,  and  con j  urers  ,' 

20.  Over  sentinels,  dancers  and  dancing  masters ;  over 
gbco,  gingelly  and  other  oils ;  over  seeds,  over  hitter  flavor,  over 
observers  of  religious  ceremonies,  over  chemists  amd  nmlos. 

21.  Jupiter  presides  over  the  eastern  part  of  the  Indus,, 
the  western  half  of  Muttra,  the  countries  of  Bbarata,  and. 
Sonveera;  the  town  of  Srughna,  the  province  of  Udmbya, 
the  Vipasa  and  the  Satadru  rivers,  the  countries  of  ltamatha,. 

Salva ; 

22-  Trigarta,  Pourava,  Ambashta,  Parata,  Yotadhana 
Yondhoya,  Sarasvata,  Arjunayana,  one  half  of  Matsya  ; 

23.  Over  elephants,  horses,  priests,  rulers,  ministers,  marri¬ 
ages  and  health  ;  over  mercy,  truthfulness,  cleanliness,  religi¬ 
ous  observances  ;  over  learning,  gifts  and  charity  ; 

24.  Over  citizens,  richmen,  grammarians,  Yedic  students, 
sorcerers,  lawyers,  tho  ensigns  of  royalty— the  umbrella,  the 
Pag  staff,  the  Ohamara  aud  tho  like  ; 


t  Katlia  ;  is  tho  Gaadak  according  to  Kasyapa. 


BIU  U AT  BAMHITA* 


s. 


viku,‘:  man  sit  tah  j'a^f  ku$>htha,§ 

Venus  presides  over  tho  town  of  Takahasoela ,  iho 


countries  of  Marti kavata,  Balmgiri,  Gundh&rft,  Pushkalavntaka 
Piastiiala,  Malwa,  Kaikaya,  Dasarna,  Osinara  and  Sibi. 


27.  Over  the  people  living  on  tlio  banks  of  tho.  Vithasla, 
the  Irawadi  and  the  Chandrabhaga  ;  over  chariots,  silver  mines 
elephants,  horses,  elephant  driver.1  and  rich  men  ; 

28.  Over  perfumes,  flowers,  perfumed  paste,  gem.-, 
diamonds,  ornaments,  lotus  or  conch  shells,  beds,  bride¬ 
grooms,  young  men,  young  women,  objects  tending  to  provoke 
dustful  desires  and  persons  that  eat  good  and  sweet  meals  .; 

29.  Over  gardens,  waters,  voluptuaries  and  lowed  men  ; 
over  fame,  comfort,  generosity,  beauty,  and  learning  ,*  over 
ministers,  merchants,  potters,  birds  and  triphala.* 

SO.  Over  simple  silk,  colored  silk,  flannel  doth,  white 
silk,  rod  lira,  f  patra,J  chocha,§  nutmeg,  agaruJI  vacbaA 
pjppiti*  and  sandal. 

*  BaUeiku ;  benzoin  or  sioras  kuown  in  Tamil  oa 

f  Mansi  :  otherwise  known  as  Jataumiiei,  ft  .medicinal  grass— -Cy][>or>-'3, 
stolon  if  ureas  known  in  Tamil  as  *L  n'tttrw  •*. 

I  Taliara he  plant  C&sift  Torn.  whoso  seed  is  known  iu  Tamil  os  w 
•Der.tr. 

$  Kuihtba :  a  medicinal  plant  used  an  a  wmody  for  the  disease  balled 
Takman— Ccwttiii.  Speoiosu.  or  Arabics  known  in  Tamil  a  a 

||  Cboraka  :  Hie  liask  of  card-.raom  known  in  Tamil  an  or  o»,»|JJ*r<i» 

*  Triplmla:  tho  three  fruits— tlio  three  mjrobaiarn,  tho  fruits 
Terminaim  Chobula.  T.  Belleriea,  and  Phyllau  thus  Krabhca  Known  m 

Tamil  as  p  refiAitirii  and  Q&tfoS<*A‘riii; 


or  the  fchrei  fragrant  fruits  oF  nutmeg,  arccanub  and  cloves  ; 
ot  the  three  sweet  fruit s  of  grape,  pomegu  nato  and  date. 

t  Rodhra :  the  treo  Symplocos  Raeemosa  having  yellow  leaves, 
known  in  Tamil  as  QfwSar  Q*>Tp0u>ra>. 
t  Rat*  a  :  tha  leaves  oi  Oi  imam  on. 

$  Ohoobutho  bark  of  Cinnamon  .  __  ..  „ 

||  A  guru  :  Agallochum,  Arnyris  Agallocla  known  in  fartm  as 


tt  J*»i* 


Yacha:  a  kind  of  aromatic  root  (according  to  some  orn?  root 

hno^u  in  Tamil  as  m  Q  jPaC 

♦  pippili Ion  gpopper—  Piper  longum  known  in  Uroil  as 


lift  THAT  BAllHITA. 


31  •  Saturn  presides  over  the  countries  of  Anarta,  Arbu- 
a,  Pn&hkaxa,  Surat,  Abhira,  Sndra,  Raivafca-ka,  countries 
through  which  the  river  Saraswati  passes  as  an  under  ground 
stream  and  the  western  countries. 


32.  Over  the  natives  of  Knnikshetra,  the  town  of  Somcafc, 
and  persons  born  on  tile  banks  of  the  Vidisa,  the  Vedasmriti 
and  the  Main ;  over  wicked  men,  uncleanly  men  and  men  of 
the  lowest  class  ;  over  oil  mongers,  weak  men  and  persons  not 
possessing  virility. 


33.  Over  binders,  bird  hunters,  impure  men,  boatmen, 
or  fishermen,  ugly  men  and  old  men  ;  over  dealers  in  hogs, 
chiefs  of  tribes,  men  ot  weak  resolution,  hill  men,  barbarous 
mountain  tribes  and  over  poor  men* 


*  4.  tie  also  presides  over  pungent  flavor  and  bitter 
flavor  ;  over  chemistry  ;  over  widows,  serpents,  thieves,  bufih- 
loeSj  asses,  camels,  beans,  leguminous  seeds  and  Nishpava.# 

oo.  Rfthu  presides  over  hill  men,  mountain  peaks,  outer 
muI  inner  caves,  the  Mlechas,  the  Sudras,  persons  subsisting 
on  dogs  and  jackals,  spear  men,  tho  count rios  of  Vokkana 
and  Aswnmukha  and  persons  physically  deformed. 

s®;  110  ®lao  presides  over  the  most  wicked  in  the  family, 
over  torturers,  ungrateful  men,  thieves,  persons  who  are  un¬ 
truth!  ui,  uncleanly  and  ungenerous ;  over  ass-riders,  duelists, 
persons  of  easily  irritable  temperament,  infants  in  tlio  womb 
and  Chaudalas. 


37.  Over  notorious  sinners,  fops,  Eakshasas,  excessive 
sleepers,  all  sentient  beings  and  wicked  persons;  over  black 
gram  and  gingelly  seed. 

38.  Ketu  presides  over  mountains,  fortified  cities,  the 
countries  of  Palhava,  Sweta,  IIuna>  Chola,  Avagana,  Mara 


*  Nishpava :  a  species  of  pulse— Phaseolus  Baaditus  knowu  in 
Tamil  ns 


BRIHAT  FAMIIITA 


jOkina,  and  the  land  of  the  Mleehasj  over  rich  men,  men  o 
note,  men  of  industry  and  valor  ; 


30.  Over  fcnen  coveting  the  wives  of  others,  men  prying* 
into  tlie  secrets  of  other  men,  haughty  men,  ignorant  men, 
siuuers  and  persons  fond  of  victory. 


40.  If  at  tho  time  of  re-appearance,  a  planet  should 
appear  bright,  of  large  disc  and  in  his  natural  condition,  not 
crossed  by  thunder  bolts,  meteoric  falls  or  dust  storms  and 
not  suffer  in  conjunction  wiili  other  planets  or  if  lie  should 
bo  in  his  house  or  in  his  ucohakshetra  or  if  he  should  bo 
within  site  of  a  benefic  planet,  he  will  bring  prosperity  to  tho 
persons  and  objects  presided  over  by  him* 

41.  If  on  tho  other  bund  he  should  appear  otherwise 
than  as  described  above,  the  same  persona  and  objects  will 
suffer  miseries  and  people  will  also  suffer  from  wars  and  from 
diseases  and  kings  will  be  afflicted  with  sorrow. 


42*  Though  free  from  enemies,  princes  will  suffer  from 
the  iutrigues  of  their  sous  or  ministers.  Their  subjects, 
suffering  from  drought,  will  quit  their  native  cities  and  resort 
to  new  towns  and  mountains. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

On  Planetary  Conjunctions. 

1.  Astronomers  are  able  to  predict  by  calculation  before 
hand  the  times  aud  nature  of  planetary  conjunctions.  I  have 
treated  of  this  subject  in  my  astronomical  work,  Panchasi- 
dhantika.*  basing  my  theories  on  the  Surya  Sidhanta. 

2.  The  plauets  all  revolv  e  in  the  sky  and  their  orbits  of 
motion  lie  one  above  the  other.  When  seen  from  this  groat 
distance,  the  planets  seem  to  move  on  one  even  surface. 

*  Pancbasidbantika  : — The  public  will  be  exceedingly  glad  to  hear 
that  two  cof  ios  of  this  splendid  work  on  Astronomy,  long  supposed 
to  have  been  lost,  have  becu  purchased  by  the  Bombay  Government 
and  that  G.  Thibaub  Phil.  l)r.  assisted  by  Pundit  Suddhakara  is  prepar¬ 
ing  an  edition  and  an  English  Translation  of  the  work. 


13 


BRIHAT  BAWHXTA' 


.  The  conjunctions  of  the  planets  am  of  t  sorts  known 
as  1.  Bheda,*  TJllekha, t  3.  Amsmnardanayt 

ycijW  according  ns  the  planets  arc  more  and  more 
from  each  other,  as  stated  by  Parnsara  and  other 


Itishis. 


i.  If  the  plnnets  should  bo  in  Bheda  conjunction  there 
will  be  drought  in  the  land;  friends  and  persons  of  great 
families  will  turn  into  enemies  ;  if  the  planets  should  be  in 
Ullokha  conjunction  there  will  be  wars  iu  the  land,  and  princes 
will  quarrel  with  their  enemies ;  but  there  will  bo  abundance 
of  good  food. 

o'  If  the  planets  should  be  in  Amsuvimarda  conjunction, 
kings  will  bo  at  war  and  mankind  will  suffer  from  weapons, 
from  disease  and  from  hunger  ,*  if  they  should  be  in  Apusavyu 
conjunction,  rulers  will  be  at  war  with  one  another. 

6.  The  Sun  when  in  mid  hemven  is  known  as  an  Alcranda 
planet  ;  when  in  the  East  he  is  known  as  a  Poura  planet  and 
when  in  the  West  he  is  known  as  a  Yayi  planet.  Mercury, 
Jupiter  and  Saturn  are  always  known  as  Poura  planets.  The 
Moon  is  always  known  as  an  Akrauda  planet. 

7.  Ketu,  Mars,  Kahu  and  Venus  are  known  as  Yayi 
planets.  The  planet  that  suffers  defeat§  in  conjunction  will 
cause  suffering  to  the  objects  it  represents;  but  if  triumphant, 
the  objects  will  prosper. 

8.  If  a  Poura  (citizen)  planet  should  suffer  defeat  in 
conjunction  with  another  Poura  planet,  citizens  and  rulers  will 


*  Bheda  :  this  conjunction  occurs  when  the  disc  of  ono  of  the 
planets  appears  eclipsed  by  that  of  the  other  planet. 

f  Ullekha  .*  this  occurs  wheu  the  diso  of  the  one  appears  to  rub 
against  the  disc  of  the  Of  her. 

X  Amsumarduna  •'  this  occurs  when  the  light  of  the  one  mixes 
with  the  light  of  the  other. 

11  Asavya  .*  this  occurs  when  the  planets  aro  distinctly  apart  from 
each  other. 

§  Planetary  conjunction,  is  known  in  Hindu  Astronomy  as 
Vndba  (fight) ;  when  n  plnnet  in  conjunction,  is  to  be  deemed  as  suffer- 
r*  tig  defeat  or  as  triumphant,  the  author  desciibes  further  on. 


Also  if  a  Yayi  (marching  to  war)  planet  should  suffer 
defeat  in  conjunction  with  another  Yayi  planet  or  if  an 
Akranda  (setting  up  a  War  cry)  planet  should  suffer  defeat  in 
conjunction  with  another  Akrauda  planet  or  if  either  a  Poura 
or  Yayi  planet  should  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction  with  a  Y«yi 
or  a  Poura  planet  respectively  the  objects  represented  by  the 
planet  which  suffers  defeat  will  suffer  miseries, 

9.  That  planet  is  said  to  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction, 
which  might  happen  to  be  the  Southern  one,  or  of  disagree- 
able  appearance  or  of  unsteady  light  or  which  might  begin  to 
retrograde  immediately  after  conjunction  or  which  might  ap¬ 
pear  to  he  of  small  disc  or  which  might  be  eclipsed  by  the 
other  planets  or  which  might  undergo  a  change  of  nature  or 
appear  dim  or  of  ugly  appearance. 

,  10.  If  the  planet  should  appear  otherwise  than  ns  des¬ 

cribed  above,  he  is  deemed  to  bo  the  triumphant  planet  and 
that  planet  in  conjunction  which  might  appear  of  large,  bright, 
.■dinning  disc  is  deemed  triumphant  though  he  might  be  the 
southern  planet-* 

11.  If  both  planets  should  bo  equally  bright,  large  and 
shining,  the  conjunction  is  known  ns  Samagama — mere  meet¬ 
ing  as  opposed  to  a  meeting  in  fight.  In  such  cases  there  is 
a  mutual  liking  between  the  planets — and  hence  «l«o  between 
the  persons  and  objects  they  represent ;  but  if  both  planets 
should  bo  otherwise,  the  same  persons  and  objects  will  perish. 

12.  In  cases  where  it  might  be  doubtful  whether  the 
conjunction  of  two  planets  is  a  conjunction  in  fight  or  a  mere 
meeting,  it  is  also  doubtful  whether  princes  will  prosper  or 
suffer. 

*  The  commentator  states,  as  a  corollary  to  the  above,  that  a  piano  l  in 
.conjunction  which  might  appear  ol  small  disc  or  dim  must  be  deemed  to  antler 
defeat  though  he  might  be  the  northern  planet. 

Again  as  Venus  iso%fer  bright,  be  is  generally  tlw  successful  planet  in 
conjunctions  whether  he  happens  to  be  the  northern  or  southern  planet  accord^ 
ing  io  Surin  Sidhanlaand  Tulisa  Sidhanla, 


BRIHAT  SAHHITA. 


Tch. 


^13.  Jt  Mnrs  slioulcl  suffer  defeat  in  Ida  conjunction  wit 
ipiter,  the  Balliikae,  travellers  and  persons  that  live  by  fii  €» 
will  suffer  ;  if  ho  should  so  suffer  in  Jiis  conjunct  ion  with 
Mercury  the  Surasenas,  the  Kalmgas  and  the  Salvas  will 
suffer. 


§L 

VltTl 


14.  If  Mars  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction  with 
^  ft  turn,  townsmen  will  prosper  but  Country  people  will  suffer; 
if  he  should  so  suffer  in  liis  conjunction  with  Venus,  stor©~ 
houses,  the  Miechus  and  the  Kslrntriyas  will  suffer. 


15.  If  Mercury  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Mars,  trees,  rivers, Jascetios,  the  people  of  Asmaka,  the 
people  of  the  North,  sacrificial  rites  and  the  Deekshitas  per* 
forming  them  will  suffer  much. 


Iff.  If  Mercury  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Jupiter,  the  Mleehas,  the  Sudras,  thieves,  rich  men,  the 
people  of  Trigarta  and  those  of  mountainous  countries  will 
suffer  and  there  will  also  be  Karth-quakes. 

17.  If  Mercury  should  sutler  defeat  in  his  conjuncnion 
with  Saturn,  boatman,  soldiers,  creatures  of  water,  rich  men 
and  pregnant  women  will  suffer  ;  if  lie  should  so  sutler  in  his 
conjunction  with  Venus,  there  will  be  fear  of  injury  from  lire 
and  crops,  clouds  and  travellers  will  suffer, 


18.  If  Jupiter  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Venus,  the  people  of  Kuluta,  of  Kandahar,  of  Kaikaya, 
of  Madra,  of  Salva,  of  Vntsa  and  of  Bengal  will  suffer  ;  crops 
and  cows  will  perish* 

10.  .If  Jupiter  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Mars,  the  people  of  Madhyadesa  and  princes  will  suffer 
and  cows  will  perish  ;  if  lie  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction 
with  Saturn,  t-h©  people  of  Arjimayana,  of  Y7asati,  of  You-? 
dheya,  of  Sibi  and  the  Brahmins  will  perish. 

20.  If  Jupiter  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Mercury,  the  Mleclms,  truthful  nien,  armed  soldiers  and 


THAT  SAMTTITA. 

hIbo  the  various  persons  and 
will  Buffer, 

21.  If  Jupiter  should  suffer  defeat  in  liis  conjunction  with 
Venus,  trnvei  I  oik  and  eminent  men  will  perish.  The  Brahmins 
and  the  Kshatriyas  will  be  at  war  and  there  will  he  no  rain. 

22.  ^  The  people  of  K«mla,  Kalinin,  Rental,  ValsaMatsya 

Madhyaoesa  and  Sarasena  and  hermaphrodites  will  tsuffer 
groat  miseries. 

^  If  venus  should  suffer  defeat  ia  Ids  conjunction  with 
Alars,  the  chiefs  ..f  armies  will  perish  and  princes  will  be  at 
war;  if  Venus  should  so  suffer  ioiris  ooujuncUon  with  Mercury, 
the  people  of  mountainous  Countries  will  suffer;  milk  will  be 
injured  and  there  will  be  slight  rain. 

24,  If  Venus  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction  with 
Saturn,  the  chiefs  of  tribes,  soldiers,  the  Kshatriyas  and  crea¬ 
tures  of  water  will  suffer  ;  the  several  objects  and  persons  pre¬ 
sided  over  by  Venus  will  also  suffer  in  addition. 

25.  It  St  turn  should  s’uffer  defeat  iu  his  conjunction 
with  Venus,  the  price  of  food  grains  will  rise  and  snakes  and 
birds  will  suffer.  If  lie  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction  with 
Mars,  the  people  of  Tankann,  of  Northern  circars,  of  Orissa,  of 
Benares,  and  ofBalhika  will  suffer. 

<jt>.  II  Saturn  should  suffer  defeat  in  his  conjunction 
with  Mercury,  the  people  of  Bengal,  tradesmen,  birds,  animals 
and  snakes  will  suffer;  if  he  should  so  suffer  in  his  conjunction 
witli  Jupiter,  women  will  he  happy  ;  buffaloes  and  the  Scy¬ 
thians  will  suffor. 

27  •  Thus  have  been  described  the  special  effects  of  the 
defeats  of  M ura,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn  in  their 
conjunctions,  each,  with  the  other  planets.  To  these  effects 
must  bo  added  the  effects  resulting  to  the  several  objects  and 
persons  presided  over  by.  the  several  planets.  Those  will 
suffei  in  propoifion  to  the  extent  of  defeat  of  tbeplanpts  pre¬ 
siding  over  them. 


liyadosa  will  suffer  ; 
presided  over  by  Jupiter 


jmiHAT  SAMITA. 


flTUHAT  SX  &  HIT  A.  [CH. 

of  Indian  Geographical  trims  alpha  Let ically  arranged  with 
their  modern  names  given 


AVJhinagari,  Dwnmka  ( Hie  old). 

A  h iuoliftt m ,  A h icclmttior, 

Ajamoethatiij,  A  (mere. 

A kasagn rga ,  Mumlakinoo. 

AtaUaimtadu  A  liikmmda. 

A  rarnkantaka,  Orrievkantiik. 

A  mbashta,  Lahore  (District). 
AUiritHnams,  Amritsar. 

An  art  am,  Knttywnr. 

Anarthanag&ree,  Dv\ nrnka  (the  old). 
Andhauanngnrmti,  Vega  ;  Vengi. 
Anga,  Bengal  proper  noav  Bhagalpar. 
Angsdapuri,  Shfthabad  (in  Onde). 
Angadeivya,  Shahn  ad  (in  Onde). 
Angaflesu,  Bh  acral  pur  (the  District). 
Angapuri,  Bhagalpur  (tlm  town). 
Antarvedi,  Gargotic  Doab. 

Apaga,  Apaga  (a  stream). 

Arntfca,  Gnjerat  (province;  in  1  nnjab. 
Arbuda,  Ahoo. 

A  ryavnrta,  Northern  India. 

ABhmaka,  Tmvanooro. 

A  si,  Asi  (river). 

Aflmakjv  Bhira  (Parana)  ? 

Atroyi,  Atrao  (river). 

Avan tay all,  Malwa  (Wee^ert i). 

Avanti,  Oojien, 

Avantipurnm,  ¥antipnr 
Ayodhya,  Oude  (the  town). 

B 

ilftlesAvamm,  Balaaor. 

Balliika,  Balk. 

B had  in,  R&rtm. 

Bhagirathee.  Uooghly  ;  Ganges. 
Bharamvaraha,  India. 

Bbarnkaecha,  haroach. 

Bheema,  tieonja. 

Blieeummtj,  Boenia, 

Bhogavaii,  Bagmati. 

B rn  h  m  apn  JJ  r a ,  B  rah nsaptt t y a. 

Bmhmrvsarah,  BrahmasariiH. 
JBrahmayom  :  Brahiiiajniii  (a  hill). 
Brilirmvvarta,  India  Upper. 

B  n  uda  va  na,  ft  r  it  idaUm . 

C 

Chrdr  yakiigii Katnagiri. 

Ohapri  j»af  Bbngnlpnr  (tin  town'. 


opposite  to  each. 

Chandra,  Ohenab. 

C 1 » and  iMkanta,  Oh  and  |  m  r . 

Chandrika,  Chenab. 

Chirmauvart,  Chimibol. 

Cbatrngrama  Chittagong, 
j  Oheona,  Chinn. 

,  Chintarathyn,  Chindintlmi!*. 

I  Chitrn,  Ohlttanr, 

Chitr  iknta,  Obit rakote, 

0 h i t ropa le,  Chi ttn u r. 

Cholairmndala*  Oorornandal, 

D. 

Da  k:)h i ntvnin na?a.m,  Dnkshinamanas. 
Pnkdiinnp  ifcha,  Southern  India. 

Carnal iptani ,  Tumlook. 

1  >arn odnra,  Duimdar. 

Darada,  Dard  (the  country). 

Dat-d nragiri,  South  Eastern  Ghauts. 
Dam  pu ram,  Dh  of  pore  ? 

Dasaptira,  Part  of  .Malwa  or  Bond©! 

Knud. 

TLiRftmn,  Hasan  (river  or  country.) 
Dnserakii,  the  Great  Desert. 

Devagiri,  JDeogir  or  Dowlafcabad. 
Dfcvahrida,  Deverkunda. 

Devikodbani*  Dinajpore  (Southern). 
Dhara,  l)h©r. 

Dhanmipat  nnam,  S^het  Mahefc  ? 
Dharrnapuram ,  Dl.ai  inapur. 
Dharmaranyam,  .D  harinruii. 
Drifihtadvate,  Cagar. 

Dushpara,  Oheimub, 

Dwaravali,  Dwamka  (the  old.) 
Dwarikn,  pwawka  (the  old.) 

G 

Oadn/rama,  Gargaon, 

(?  hadhimiganim,  Kaimtij, 

Gauamjya,  Name  of  an  Empire  in  fcho 
South  of  India* 
Gandakn,  Grmda  (District.) 

Gandaki,  Gamlak. 

Gauga,  Ganges, 
j  Gnngadri,  Gargofcree. 

1  Gangadvara,  Hurdwar. 

Gaiulrtra,  Eastern  At’ganistnn. 

•  Ghnrghaia.  Oogra. 
j  Glia i dhara,  Cagar. 

Girivrija,  ‘i'jio  Capital  of  Ida  gal  a. 


SWEAT  SAMHITA- 


R/yVlr. 

mice,  Gcxiavareo'. 
uokarna,  Rnrneswaraui. 
Gtomafceo,  Gumfcee. 
Gorathagiri,  Silagiri. 
Govardhana,  Gobardh&n-. 
Gouda,  Bengal  ( Northern.) 
Gourapnri,  Gnur. 

Gui  jam,  Gujerat  (Province)  i 


rPhrjab. 


Kanakbalnm,  KhnJchal,  ('village.)  — 
Kanakhttl,  Khankhal  (the  mountain). 
Kanckipnri,  Ooujevaram. 

Kannada,  N.  Cauara. 

Kanyakubjainr  Khnonj.- 
Kapee,  Calml  (river.) 

K.vpi^a,  Cossy  fa  river  in  Midnapur.) 
Kapisco,  Opinn.. 

K‘ i  pish  talam .  Kn.it  ftal, 

Kascepnree,  Itanares. 

Kash rnira,  Cashmere. 

Kafcuka,  Cuttack. 


Haimavater,  Ganges. 

Harikoliyu,  Bbmjml  (Eastern.) 
Huriprawfchan,  Delhi  (town.) 

Hataka,  Lad'ak  (province.) 

Heraakuta,  A  mountain  to  the  north  of 
the  Ifiinaluyas. 

Homanta,  Ilorna, 

Tlirauvate,  Ramaganga. 

Diranyabahu,  Sona  (river.) 
Hiraryavnha,  Sona  (river.) 

Hradine®,  Jbelum  (river..) 

I 

Indraprastliam,  Delhi  (town.) 

Induja,  Norbudda. 

Indumafceo,  Kaloomudoe  (Eastern.) 
Tndnmateo,  CJheiiaub  ? 

Iravati^  Ravoe, 

J 


Kuveri,  Cuuvery  (river.) 

Kcckadhu,  Italian  (Southern.) 

Koera,  Cashmere*. 

Kelu,  Canara. 

Koralu,  Malabar. 

Ketakapnramr  Kaira. 

Klmgi,  Kakpur. 

Khatwangi,  Panehagunga. 

Khunamus!  a,  Khunotmudi, 
Koluhalagiri,  Brabmajiuin  (ft  IrftL> 
Kolupuram,  Colaporo, 

KoTiknna,  Konkan. 

Kosala,  Oude  (tho  province). 

Ko-seo,  KoBt. 

Konsambi,  Kosam. 

Konsikeo,  Coosi. 

Kousikoe  Kaccimh,  Parnea  (theMAe- 

trict). 

Kramaraiyam,  Kamraj. 

Krishna  Venue,  Krishnu. 

Krifcha  Koueika,  Hydrabad  (Western). 
Krouncha,  a  mountain  on  the  North 
of  A  Baum. 


Jalundlmra,  Julltmder  Doab. 
Jarabavaka,  Jumna. 

Janhavoe,  Ganges. 

Jamnabbumi,  India  (Northern.) 

Jitm  Chakri,  India  (Northern.) 
Jaypura,  Jaipur. 

Jyotirathee,  Jolula. 

X 

Kaccha,  Chnshak  (tho  plain.) 
Kaechara,  Cachar? 

Kalanjara,  Calinjar. 

Kalindapui’am,  Karnapur. 

Kaiindee,  Jamua. 

Kaliugu,  A  District  in  tho  Coroman- 
dal  coast  (Gan  jam  District.) 
Kalin ganagari,  Rajmaheudri. 
Kalyanam,  Calian. 

Kalyaneo,  Kalian ce. 

Kauiampa,  Kamroop. 

Kamrilyam,  Katin  pi  1. 


Kubita,  Knln  (tho  district) j 
Kumala,  Gomnl. 

Kumftrika,  Comarin. 

Kundinam,  13  id  a  r  ? 

Knntala,  Hyderabad  (S.  Wcstoru). 
Korn,  Delhi. 

Kurnjangalum,  Morut  (tho  division), 
Kurnkshefcra,  Pan  f  put. 

Knsasthalam,  Kanbuj. 

KusastlialoG,  Ramnagar  P 
Knsavate,  Ramanagar. 
Knaumapuram,  Patua. 

1 1 

Lad  ha,  Ahmed  abad  District. 
Lakshanavati,  Gaur. 

I  Lalitapattanam,  Lalitputtam. 
Lampaka,  Lamghah. 

Langalmoe,  Naglaudi. 

Lanka,  an  island  in  the  Equator. 

1  Lavauu,  Looni. 


miMT  SAMIIIT.Y. 


[C  It- 


Labor, 
tya,  Bralmuiputia. 

Jvr 


Madbiwmter,  Sind  (a  river  in  Cnah- 

meiv), 

M  acltm  pu  ran  • ,  Mad  I  m  pur, 

Mmihura,  Madura. 

Madhyudosu,  pcnU-al  India. 

Madm,  Bhutan. 

lttadradesa,  Rechnm  D^ab  tJower.) 
Madrishmnti,  Bhoragur. 

.Magadha,  B*har  (South.) 

M&gad  hi ,  Pa  nehani. 

Nahaktseo,  Koai. 

Mahanudi,  Phalgn. 

Mid  arashtra,  Hyderabad  (West). 
Maltfiittulxnaftmna,  WaUu*  Lake. 

Malice,  My  he. 

Mahoesuro,  Mysore. 

Mahendragiri.  has  tern  Ghaut  a, 

M  ihcxUyam,  lvanouj. 

Mak  oUvapuram ,  M  ahobia. 

Malaria,  Shahabad, 

Malawi*,  Mai w a. 

Malftyaohala,  Southern  Ghauts. 
Maiayavara.  Malabar. 

Matinee,  Bhngulpnr  (town.) 

Multnoo,  Paisnneo. 

Mallabhnmi,  Bankoro. 

Mallusthariani,  Multan. 

Maly  a  van,  ft  mountain  to  fcbo  East  of 
Mount  Meru. 

Mandakini,  Paitau. 

Mauimantha,  .Salt  Range. 

Maniparam,  Munipore, 

Maajnla,  Maujira. 

Maras  a,  r,be  Gttafc  desert. 

Maruoaccha,  Buroach. 

Mathura,  Muttra. 

Hatayaclosa,  JVypore. 

M  a v  a pu  rn,  May  apu  r . 

Moknla.  Omeraknntak  (the  mount.) 
Mokaludnjn,  Nerbada. 

Mek alakanya,  Nerbada. 

Mithila,  Tirhut. 

Modagiri,  Moongyr. 

Modapnram,  Made  war  ? 

Mohanee.  Mehnnee. 

M urala,  Kulindi, 

N 

tf&gapa t  for.  am,  Kogaptitarn. 
Nairunjina,  Nilajan  (a  torrent.) 
Ka(a80to,  Adam’s  bridge. 


Nanda,  Alnknnundfv, 
Nundir.ee,  Otde  (the  town.) 
Nasikya,  Nasik. 

Nawadwoepa  ,  Naddoa. 
Neelnchala,  Niluchal  (a  hill,) 
Nepalft,  Nepaui. 

NiVchnvi,  Tirhut. 

N  i  rv i i id  h y a ,  Bar  w  a  ti  (West.) 
Nishada,  tho  Bhil  Country, 


Ottdhra,  Northern  Orissa. 

P 

Padmukshetm,  one  of  tho  four  Bacred 
districts  in  GriS'U. 
Padmapnra,  Bampur. 

PadmavatS,  Cuttack  ? 

Bndnmvati,  Pudma. 

Pnm pa,  Pun  no it  ? 

Banohami,  Punch  an, 

Pnnchanada,  Punjab. 

Banchavati,  Nassik. 

Batichaparo,  Punjab. 

Panjagaram,  Banna. 

Parasika,  Persia. 

Barna,  A  Brahmin  settlement  between 
the  Jamna  and  the  Ganges, 
Pfirnasa,  Punnftss,  Punch  (village.) 
Pariytatra,  Tho  central  or  western 
portion  of  the  Yindhya  mountains, 
Pat  ali pu  tra ,  Patna. 

Patishtanain,  Paitan. 

Pa*  tanam,  Pa  ttn  n . 

J’eetaseela,  Hyderabad  (in  Sind.) 
Phalgnli,  Phalgu. 

Phonagiri,  A  mountain  on  the  north  of 
tho  river  Indus, 
I’inakini,  Pemmr  (river.) 

Poorvogimga,  Nerbada. 

Pondanva,  Badaon. 

Prabhasan,  Pattan  Somanatb  ? 
Pragjyotisho,  Kamrcopf 
Pragjy otisbapnram,  Gauhati. 
Prasthala,  Pattata. 

Prathudakam,  Pehoa. 

F'rayaga,  Allahabad  (Province.) 

Preta  kuta,  Preta  kula  (Gaya.) 
Punahpuna,  Ptmpun. 

Ppndra,  tho  modern  Bengal  aiid  Behar, 
Pnndravardhana,  Pandna. 
Pnnnyabhmni,  N ortho i  a  India, 
lhi rani y a,  Pumoa  (town.) 

.Puri,  Puri, 

•I'urvambndhi,  Bay  of  Bengal. 


BKItfAT  SAMHITA* 


.rain ,  Poktir. 
pttrflm,  IJatna. 


U 


Radha,  Western  Bengal, 

Raivataka,  Girinar. 

Rajagrihani,  Rtvjgar, 

Rajamahendri,  Rajamabendri. 
Rajapuri,  Rajoari. 

Ram&gunga,  llamgnnga. 

Ramahrida,  Kurukshefra  (tho  lake  ?) 
Reva,  Nerbada, 

Rikshaparvata,  Satpura  mountains. 
Rishigiri,  UcJayagiri  (noar  Rajgur.) 
Rishikhlya,  Risiknlia. 
ttodrana,  Adams’  peak. 

Rohitam,  Rohtak. 

Itnma,  Lake  of  Samber. 

Rungttpuram,  Rangponv 


Sowaslhavam,  Swat  (town.) 
Sowaathavee,  Swat  (river.) 
Sravasti,  b’ahet  Afahet  ? 

Srihatta,  Sylbeh. 

Sreeksbefcram,  Puri. 
Srirnngapattanam,  Seringapatam. 
Srighnu,  Sug. 

Sthanuteertuaxn,  Thanes  war. 
Suhma,  Western  Benga\ 
Sundurivana,  Sunderbana. 
Surapuram,  Sopur. 

Surasena,  Muttra,  (Province.) 
Suriakunda,  Dekshinamanas 
Sorparakum,  Sup/i. 
Swarnagramam,  Snnarg&on. 
Swamalee,  Maodakineo. 
Swainarekha,  Snbunrakhn . 
Syandikva,  Sai. 


S 

Shyndri,  Siadree. 

Sahyadri,  Western  Ghauts. 

Saka,  the  country  of  the  Soythyaus 
Sakalam,  Wangle. 

Sakambhari,  Samber, 

Saketa,  Aycdlna. 

Salatura,  Lavor. 

Samanaswaea,  Jumna. 

Samasthalee,  Gangetio  Doab. 
b'&nkasyam  saukesa. 

Saprayoga,  Hugra. 

Saradarda,  Choya,  Cbittang. 

Saravati,  do.  do. 

8ara>  u,  Sarju,  Gogra. 

Sarpika,  Sai. 

Satadro,  Sutlej. 

Sayy&nftrat,  Kurukahefcra  (lake  ?) 
Seetakundam,  Seetakur.d,  near  Moorgir. 
Setubunci&a,  Adam's  bridge, 
fribika,  A  district  in  Cashmere. 
Simbala,  Ceylon. 

Sindhn.  Sind  (a  river  in  Cashmere.) 
Sindhodesa,  Northwestern  Punjab. 
Sirisham,  Biriea. 

Sivi,  Jetch  Doab,  (Lower.) 

Sitadro,  Satie;}. 

SomodbViava,  Nerbada. 

Son  a,  Son. 

Soudhadesa,  Soonda  (District.) 
8oudbapnram,  Soona  (town.) 
Rourandhra,  Rarhind. 

Soun  shtra,  Gajirat,  Kftttiwar. 
Souveora,  Jetch  Doab  (Upper.) 
Sowaatba,  Swat  (District.) 


Tftkbnm,  Tartars. 

Tahkapuram,  Tuki  ^  t'aujab  ) 
Talakotam,  Tali  cot. 

Tamaliks.  Turn  look. 

Tamralipta,  Tnmlook. 

Tamraparn i,  Tamarubari . 

Tangana,  Name  of  a  people  »n  tho 
Upper  part  of  tho  valley  of  Sarayti. 
Tapateo,  Tup  tee. 

Tapee,  Tapteo. 

Tilirga,  Hyderabad  (East.) 

Tirabhukti,  Tirhut. 

Tiryaksrota,  Raveo  ? 

Trigartft,  Lahore. 

Tri^artnui,  Tehora. 

Trilinga,  Hyderabad  (East,) 
Tripafchaga,  Ganges, 

Tripuri,  To  war. 

Tri  arofa,  Ganges. 

Tungabhudra,  Tumbudra. 

Tungavena,  Tonga. 

Turushka,  Turkestan. 


U. 


Uda,  Orissa. 

Udayagiri,  Udayagiri  in  Orissa. 
Udncnbara,  Cutch. 

Ugra,  Canara. 

Ujayantha,  Girinar. 

Ujjayini,  Oojien, 

Uloka,  Kulu  (District) 

Upahalaka,  Hyderabad  (South  West). 
Uraso,  Kush. 

'  Useenara,  Jotch  (doab)  Lower. 


H 


JBRlfiAT  SAMHITA. 


naram,  Uekara. 

>1  Orissa. 

fcaranmnasam,  Uttaramaiitia  (in 
Gayaj. 


Tahikft,  ’Pnnj’ib. 

Va ir.ud  ha  rn ,  Bairat , 

Variant:},  Besara. 

Vaitarani,  Baitarinoo. 

Yalabhi,  Babri. 

Vaoitganga,  Banganga. 
Vattfemalttiee,  Dwamka  (tlie  oM). 
Vanavaai,  Soonda  the  District). 
Varga,  Hast  Bengal* 

Vanjnla*  Manjira. 

Varada,  Bared  a  Murda. 
Vanvbagiri,  Baibftrgiri. 

Varaham ula,  Barmula. 

Varanasi,  Bonn  res. 

Varann,  Barna. 

Varans vata,  Allahabad. 
Vavanfivabaui,  Bara  on. 

Vardh  am  ana,  Bind  wan. 

Varcndra,  Bengal  (North). 
Vamakubim .  Warangal. 

Yarwvva,  Bunnoo. 

Yarn n r  r  <ir*im  (the  river.) 

Yaru nee.  Kaleenadee.  (West). 
Vatadhanam,  Bafan&ir, 
Vatsadesa,  Allahabad. 
Vatfiapatfcnftxn,  Kosaru. 
‘Vedaeruti,  Sot.,buti. 


‘"§L 


Vedavati,  Vadawntec. 

Veorabhnmi,  Birbhttm, 

Vena,  'Verna. 

Venasangagtv,  Sanglee. 

Vetravati,  Bet  wa. 

V idarbha,  Hyderabad  ( W eft) . 

Berar :  Bidar  ? 

Vidaemriti,  Sot ;  J3uti. 

Yideba,  A  District  in  the  province 
of  Behar  (Ancient  Mithila).  Thcr 
modern  TIrboot. 

Vidirni  Bhilsa. 

Vidymiagararn,  Dijoynagar. 

Vihara,  Behar  (Town), 

Vikiamaparam,  Bikrampnr. 
Vindhayachala,  Vindhaya  m contain*, 
Vipftsa,  Beas. 

Vipulagiri,  Bipnlgiri. 

Viratanagarara,  Bairat. 

Visala,  Oojien. 

Vishnwpati.  Granges. 

Vitastba,  Jhelum. 

Vonanya,  Baclacn. 

Vriababba,  Viga  ? 

Vyavalmragiri,  Baibargiri. 


Yagapura,  Taj  pore. 

Taganapura,  Yajpore. 

Yamuna,  Jamna. 

T amtmadri ,  Jumunabri  (peak*,). 
Yaaohiira,  JoftAore. 

Ynyupurain,  Tripan. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

On  the  Moon’s  Conjunction  with  the  Planets. 

1.  If  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  the  constel- 
lotions  (wherever  possible)  and  of  the,  planets,  her  coarse  is 
known  ns  Pradaksliina  (course  from  left  to  right).  She  will 
then  cause  prosperity  to  mankind  ;  if  on  the  other  bund  the 
moon  should  pass  to  the  south  of  the  stars  and  planets  she 
will  cause  misery. 

-  2.  If  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Mars,  powerful 
mountaineers  will  triumph  in  fight  j  the  Kahatriyas  with  their 


to.]  BUT  FIAT  SAMHITA. 

es  that  march  out  for  buttle  will  prosper  and  crops  wil 


undanfc* 


3.  If  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Mercury, 
citizens  will  triumph  in  fight  ;  crops  will  flourish  ;  there  will 
be  mutual  attachment  among  men  and  the  royal  treasui  ies  will 
be  full. 


4.  If  the  moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Jupiter,  citi¬ 
zens,  Brahmins,  the  Kshatriyas,  learned  men,  acts  of  virtue  and 
charity,  the  people  of  Madbyadesa  will  prosper  and  mankind 
in  general  will  be  happy. 

5.  If  the  Moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Venus,  trea¬ 
suries,  elephants  and  horses  will  flourish  )  bow- men  that  march 
out  for  light  will  triumph  and  crops  will  prosper* 

6*.  If  the  Moon  should  pass  to  the  north  of  Saturn, 
the  rulers  of  citizens  will  triumph  in  fight  and  the  Scythians, 
the  Balhikas,  the  people  of  Sindh,  the  Palhawas,  and  the 
Yavanas  will  be  happy. 

7.  Generally  if  the  Moon*  suffering  in  no  way,  should 
pass  to  the  north  of  the  constellations  and  planets,  the  objects 
and  persons  presided  over  by  them  will  prosper  >  if  she  should 
pass  to  their  South,  the  same  objects  and  persons  will  suffer 
miseries. 


8.  In  other  words  the  effects  described,  when  the  course 
of  the  Moon  lies  to  the  north  of  planets  and  stars  will  bo 
reversed  when  her  course  lies  to  the  south  of  such  planets  and 
stars.  Thus  have  been  described  the  effects  of  the  Moon’s 
conjunction  with  stars  and  planets.  The  conjunctions  of  the 
Moon  with  the  stars  and  planets  are  not  conjunctions  in  fight 
but  are  mere  meetings  known  technically  as  SuTiiugcc'nicts, 


BTiITTAT  SAlVfHTTA. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

ON  planktaky  yeafs.# 


].  If  tho  sun  should  be  tho  lord  of  the  year,  month  or 
day,  there  will  bo  crops  here  and  there,  the  forests  will  be  fall 
of  wild,  carnivorous  animals  seeking  for  prey  ;  springs  will 
yield  but  little  water  ;  rivers  will  fall  ;  and  diseases  and 
medicine  will  not  gain  much  in  strength. 


2.  The  heat  of  the  sun  will  bs  felt  intolerable  even  in 
the  dewy  season  ;  cloud3  though  resembling  mountains  in 
fcize  will  not  yield  ranch  rain  ;  the  sky  will  be  full  of  heavenly 
bodice  of  lost  lustre  ;  ascetics  and  cows  will  bo  afflicted  with 
miseries. 


8.  Princes  will  range  over  the  land  in  military  order 
v,  i tli  proud  elephants,  horses  foot,  soldiers  and  other  strength, 
armed  with  bows,  swords,  cudgels,  and  engaged  in  attacking 
countries  as  they  march. 

4.  If  the  moon  should  be  the  lord  of  tho  year,  the  sky 
will  be  filled  with  clouds  moving  like  mountains  and  of  tho 
color  of  black  oobfa,  collyrium  or  tho  bee  and  filling*  tho 
whi  le  Earth  with  water  and  the  sky  with  the  roar  of  thunder. 


5.  Tho  tanks  will  appear  beautiful  by  the  presence,  in 
them,  of  the  lotus  and  the  white  lily,  the  groves  will  bo  full  of 
flower  trees  rendered  charming  by  the  humming  of  black  bees. 
Cows  will  yield  abundance  of  milk,  and  will  thrive  ;  and  wives 
will  please  their  husbands  by  acts  of  love  for  ever. 

tf.  There  will  be  an  abundant  growth  of  wheat,  rice, 
barley  and  other  grains  and  also  of  excellent  sugar-cane  ;  the 
towns  and  mines  will  flourish  ;  the  surface  of  the  Earth  will 
be  marked  by  the  construction  of  raised  brick  works  over  the 
sites  of  sacrificial  rites,  the  sky  will  be  filled  with  the  sound 


*  The  rule  ig  that  the  planet  in  whose  wo*k  day  the  new-m  jon  falls  in 
the  lunar  month  of  Chan.ra  is  the  reg  nt  o£  the  year  which  then  commences. 
This  Chapter  is  written  in  beautiful  Sanscrit. 


BRTHAT  SAMimX 


hymns  chanted  by  persons  engaged  in  such  rites; 
the  Earth  will  be  under  the  protection  of  good  rulers. 


7.  Jf  Mars  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year  there  will  be 
fear  from  destructive  fires  gaining  in  strength  by  the  winds 
tha  t  blow  over  them  and  consuming  villages,  towns  and  forests  ; 
mankind  will  suffer  from  the  attacks  of  robbers,  and  there 
will  be  heard  everywhere  cries  of  distress  ami  there  will  also 
be  loss  of  property  and  cattle. 


8.  Though  gigantic  clouds  might  float  together  in  the 
sky,  they  will  j  ield  little  rain.  Crops,  even  though  they  might 
be  grown  in  wet  places,  will  became  dry  and  if  they  happen  to 
grow  and  ripen  at  all,  they  will  be  cut  and  carried  away  by 
robbers. 


9.  Rulers  will  little  attend  to  the  protection  of  their 
subjects;  bilious  complaints  will  afflict  mankind  ;  there  will 
also  be  deaths  from  snake  bites  and  corps  will  suffer  blight  or 
be  otherwise  injured- 

10-  If  Mercury  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  the  arts 
of  jugglery  and  sorcery  will  thrive;  rogues  will  prosper  ; 
towns  and  villages  will  flourish  ;  musicians,  writers,  ma¬ 
thematicians  and  persons  skilled  in  the  use  of  arms  will 
abound  in  the  land  aud  rulers  will  exchange  rare  and  valuable 

g»ft3, 

11-  Mankind  will  be  truthful  ;  Vcdic  studies  will 
flourish;  criminal  courts  will  administer  justice  according  to 
the  code  of  Mann  ;  there  will  be  found  students  of  the  higher 

metaphysics  -Yoga  Vidya  and  Brahma  Guana - iu  many 

places  seeking  their  way  to  Salvation  and  there  will  also  be 
found  students  of  Logic  and  the  like  scieuces. 

1-.  Buffoons,  messengers,  poets,  children,  hermaphro¬ 
dites,  makers  of  perfumes,  and  peisons  living  on  banka,  over 
waters  and  in  mountains  will  prosper;  medicinal  plants  will 
thrive- 


BIU7JAT  SAWHm. 


[chJ 


If  Jupiter  si  ion  Id  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  the  souncf 
of  Vedic  liymns  chanted  aloud  by  Brahmins  in  sacrificial  r.fcos 
will  fill  the  sky,  cause  distvesa  to  the  enemies  of  the  rites,  and 
bring  co  the  minds  of  the  Devns  that  partake  of  tho  offerings. 


14.  Abundance  of  excellent  crops  will  mark  the  B  irth,  large 
numbers  of  elephants,  horses,  covrs  and  foot-soldiers  will 
thrive  ;  there  will  bo  an  increase  of  wealth  ;  mankind  Will  be 
happy  under  tho  protection  of  just  rulers  and  tho  Earth  will 
assume  an  appearance  qaite  as  bright  as  the  starry  heavens- 


15.  The  sky  will  be  full  of  various  huge  clouds  yielding 
abundance  of  rain  ;  crops  will  thrive  and  there  will  be  pros¬ 
perity  in  the  land.* 


1().  If  Venus  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  rice  crops 
and  sugar-canes  will  flourish,  low  grounds  will  be  tilled  with 
vain  water,  tanks  will  appear  beautiful  on  account  of  the  lotus 
growing  in  them  ;  and  the  Earth  will  assume  an  appoaraoce 
quite  as  charming  as  a  lady  be-decked  with  jewels. 

17-  Rulers  will  achieve  success  in  war  ;  the  sky  will  be 
filled  with  the  sound  of  the  joy  of  triumph  from  the  soldiers 
of  the  army;  all  good  men.  will  be  happy  and  wicked  men 
will  dwindle  and  perish;  towns  and  villages  will  thrive  and 
the  Earth  will  be  under  the  protection  of  just  rulers. 

18.  The  spring  season  will  be  marked  by  husbands 
frequently  imbibing  delightful  honey  (winej  in  the  company 
of  their  wives;  pleasant  music  from  the  flute  and  the  lyre 
will  oft  delight  the  oar  aud  mankind  will  partake  of  their 
meals  in  company  with  visitors,  friends  and  kinsmen  and  tho 
god  of  love  will  revel  in  triumph. 

19  If  Saturn  should  be  the  lord  of  the  year,  the  land 
will  suffer  from  wicked  men,  bauds  of  robbers  and  big  wars  ; 
cows  will  perish  ;  wealth  will  disappear;  there  will  be  heard 


♦  The  above  are  special  effects  for  Jupiter;  to  these  most*  be  added  the 
effects  described  (or  the  year  in  the  Ch.  on  Jupiter. 


UBJHAT  8AMMITA* * * § 

Acs  of  poople  mourning*  for  the  death  of  their  kinsnv 
•  fir  civil  strife;  severe  epidemics  will  break  out  and  afflict 
people* 


20.  Clouds  will  bo  dispensed  by  winds;  trees  will  suffer 
from  disease  ;  the  sky  will  be  filled  with  dust  concealing  from 
view  the  discs  of  the  Sun  and  Moon;  tanks  will  become  dry 
and  rivers  will  fall. 

21.  Crops  found  growing  here  and  there  will  perish  for 
want  of  water;  and  in  other  places  they  will  thrive  only 
when  fed  by  the  slight  rain  sent  down  by  In  dm. 

22.  Generally  if  the  Lord  of  the  year  should  appear  of 
small  disc  or  dim  or  in  his  Neecha  house  or  if  lie  should 
suffer  defeat  in  conjunction,  he  will  not  produce  all  the  evil 
effects  assigued  to  him.  If  he  should  be  otherwise,  the  effects 
will  bo  good.  If  a  year  already  known  to  bo  a  bad  one  (vide 
Ch.  on  Jupiter)  should  also  be  found  bad  under  this  Chapter, 
there  will  be  an  increase  of  adversity  ;  if  found  good  in  both 
ways,  then,  an  increase  of  prosperity  ;  if  found  to  be  both 
good  and  bad,  there  will  be  a  mixture  both  of  prosperity  and 
adversity. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

On  Planetary  Meetings.* 

1.  People  living  in  that  quarter  of  the  earth  will  suffer 
from  weapons,  from  hunger  and  Iron  other  miseries  in  which 
direction  a  planet  reappears  after,  or  disappears  by,  its  con¬ 
junction  with  the  Sun-t 

2.  If  when  the  planets  meet  so  as  to  form  a  circle,  a  bow, 
a  triangle,  a  rod,  a  citadel,  a  lance  or  a  Vaj.ayudhaJ  man¬ 
kind  will  suffer  from  starvation,  from  drought  aud  from  war.§ 

*  This  rtf  era  to  the  apparent  geometrical  Figures  formed  by  the 
meeting  of  planets. 

t  This  accords  with  the  opinion  of  Kapyapa . 

t  Vajrayndha  :  a  three  edged  weapon  narrow  at  the  middle  and  broad  at 
both  ends. 

§  Kaayapa  aays  that  if  the  planets  meet  in  other  than  certain  well  known 
figures  mankind  will  bo  happy. 


V IU  EX  AT  SAMEITA. 


%  i  w 

'  The  rulers  of  those  parts  of  the  earth  will  suffer  froraJ 
treigu  invasions  and  be  dispossessed  of  their  countries  by 
foreign  princes  which  correspond  to  the  quarters  of  the  heavens 
iu  which  the  sot  end  planets  are  seen  to  meet  as  described 
above  towards  night  fall** 

The  objects  and  persons  represented  by  the  several 
asteris ms  in  which  the  planets  happen  to  meet  will  suffer  ; 
but  it  the  discs  of  the  planets, should  be  bright  and  apart  from 
one  another  there  will  be  happiness  in  the  land. 

5*  Planetary  meetings  are  of  five  sorts  known  technically 
as  1.  Sumvarta ,  2.  Samagumct)  3-  $  ammo  ha,  4.  Santa ja}  5. 
Sannipata  and  6.  Kom.  Wo  will  now  dotiue  these  and  state 
their  effects. 


6*.  If,  in  a  single  sign,  Ponra  planets  and  Yayi  planets 
should  meet  together  to  the  number  of  4- or  5,  the  meeting  is 
known  as  Samvarta,  If  either  Bahu  or  Ketu  should  join 
them  the  meeting  is  known  ns  Sanimoba. 


7.  If,  in  a  single  sign,  there  should  meet  either  Poura 
planets  or  Yayi  planets,  in  either  case  the  inciting  is  known 
as  Samaja.  If  when  Saturn  and  Jupiter  meet,  some  other 
planet  should  join  them,  the  meeting  is  known  as  Kosa.f 

8.  I  ho  meeting  of  a  planet  which  reappears  in  the  west 
with  another  planet  which  reappears  in  the  east,  after  their 
conjunction  with  the  Sun  is  known  as  Sannipatn.  If  the 
meeting  planets  should  suffer  no  change  in  their  nature  and 
should  appear  bright  and  of  large  size,  the  meeting  is  known 
as  Samagama.  There  will  then  be  prosperity  in  the  land. 

9.  The  effects  of  the  Sauivarta  and  Samagama  meetings 

are  indifferent - i.  e.  there  will  be  neither  much  of  pros- 


*  Linos  drawn  from  Madhyiuhsa  and  (tom  the  Zenith  to  the  night 
points  of  the  compass  will  divide  both  tho  Earth  an  the  sky  into  eight  equal 
parts  and  the  Mnuhjadesa  will  ooriospond  to  mid-heaven. 

f  This  accords  with  the  opinion  of  Badura>ana  ;  but  according  to  Ptu  .i- 
aara  if  when  Jupiter  and  one  or  two  ether  planets  meet,  Saturn  should  join 
thorn,  tho  meeting  ia  known  as  Kosa, 


BRIHAT  fUMHITA. 

of  adversity  ;  the  effects  of  the 
meetings  are  disastrous  in  their  character  ;  in  the 
Samaja  meeting  there  will  be  an  equal  degree  of  prosperity 
and  adversity  ;  and  in  the  Sannipata  meeting,  mankind  will 
bo  at  war  with  one  another. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

On  the  Rain  Clouds.* 

1.  As  food  is  tlie  support  of  life  and  food  depends  upon 
rain,  it  is  important  to  discover  the  laws  of  rain  by  any 
means. 

2.  I  will  now  proceed  to  state  these  laws  in  accordance 
with  the  views  of  Garga,  JParasara^  Kasyapa,  Yatsa  and 
ofchevs  on  the  subject. 

3.  The  predictions  of  an  astronomer  who  pays  exclusive 
attention,  both  day  and  night  to  the  indications  of  rain 
afforded  by  pregnant  clouds*  will  as  litlto  fail  of  success  as 
the  words  of  Rishis. 

4.  What  science  can  possibly  excel,  in  interest,  the 
science  relating  to  the  prediction  of  rain,  by  a  thorough  study 
of  which  one  though  ignorant  in  other  matters  passes  for  a 
great  astrologer  in  this  Iron  Age. 

5.  Somet  say  that  the  days  of  the  appearance  of  the 
pregnant  clouds  immediately  follow  the  bright  half  of  the 

lunar  month  of  Karttika - October  and  November-  This 

view  is  not  however  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  many 
writers  on  the  subject.  Wo  therefore  will  give  here  the  views 
of  Garga  and  others. 

6.  The  days  on  which  clouds  are  to  be  deemed  pregnant 
commence  from  the  day  when  the  Moon  reaches  the  Asterism 

*  The  main  idea  in  this  Chapter  is  that  clouds  that  appear  in  certain  sea¬ 
sons  of  the  year  are  to  be  deemed  as  pregnant  clouds  and  that  they  yield  rain 
at  particular  times  and  places. 

t  Somd*:  Siddhasona  and  men  of  his  School. 


15 


BRIHAT  BA.MHITA, 


Ashadha*  on  any  of  the  lunar  days  from  the 


►right  half  ox  tho  lunar  month  ot  Margasira- 
and  December. 


7.  If  pregnant  clouds  appear  when  the  Moon  is  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  Asterism  the  delivery  of  rain  will  fall  195  days  after, t 
when  the  Moon  will  be  in  tho  same  Asterism. 

8.  Clouds  conceiving  daring  the  bright  half  will  be  de¬ 
livered  during  the  dark  half  of  a  lunar  month  and  clouds  con¬ 
ceiving  during  the  dark  half  will  be  delivered  during  the 
bright  half,  Also  clouds  conceiving  during  tho  day  will  be 
deli v  red  at.  night  and  clouds  conceiving  nt  night  will  bo 
delivered  during  tho  day  ;  also  clouds  conceiving  in  the  twi¬ 
light  of  the  morning  will  be  delivered  in  the  twilight  of  the 
evening  and  clouds  conceiving  in  the  twilight  of  the  evening 
will  bo  delivered  in  the  twilight  of  the  morning.} 

9.  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  bright  and  dark  halves 

of  the  month  of  Margasira - November  and  December  and 

ij.  the  bright  half  of  Pousha - December  and  January-— 

will  be  delivered  of  rain  z-espeefcively  in  the  dark  half  of 

Jyeslibha - May  and  June — and  in  the  bright  and  dark 

halves  of  Ashadha - June  and  July  ;  but  the  fall  of  rain  in 

these  cases  will  only  be  moderate  ;  and  clouds  that  conceive 
in  the  dark  half  of  Pousha  will  be  delivered  of  rain  in  the 
bright  half  of  Sravana - July  and  August. 


II).  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  bright  half  of  Magha 
January  and  February, — will  be  delivered  of  xmain  in  tho  dark 
half  of  Sravuna  aud  those  that  conceive  in  the  dark  half  of 


*  P.  AsViadba  or  tlio  first  quarter  of  tJ.  Ashadha  according  to  commen¬ 
tator. 

f  i.o.,  fully  7  months  after,  as  tho  sidorial  period  of  tho  Moon  is  exactly 
27  days,  7  hoars,  13  minntes  11*4  seconds.  This  Stanza  enables  us  to  determine 
the  very  day  of  thy  occurrence  of  rain. 

X  The  Commentator  adds  :  clouds  conceiving  at  mid-day  -will  bo  delivered 
at  mid-night  a?*!  vice  verso .  Jn  all  these  cases  the  interval  between  conception 
and  delivery  is  of  course  395  days.  This  stanza  enables  us  to  determine  tho 
v$ry  hour  of  the  occurrence  of  rain  fall. 


BEIHAT  SAMHITA. 


1 


a  will  be  delivered  in  the  bright  half  of  Bhadrapada- 
gust  and  September. 

11*  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  bright  half  of  Phalguna 
— February  and  March — will  be  delivered  of  rain  in  the  davk 
half  of  Bhaclrapada  and  those  that  conceive  in  the  dark  half 
of  Phalguna  will  be  delivered  in  the  bright  half  of  Aswayuja 
— September  and  October. 

12.  Clouds  that  conceive  in  the  bright  half  of  Cliifcm 
— March  and  April— will  bo  delivered  of  rain  in  the  dark  half 
of  Aswayuja  and  those  that  conceive  in  the  dark  half  of  Chitra 
will  be  delivered  in  the  bright  half  of  Karttika — October  and 
November.* 

13*  Clouds  that  conceivo  in  the  East*]  will  be  deli¬ 
vered  in  the  west  and  clouds  that  conceive  in  the  west 
will  1)6  delivered  in  the  east.  The  same  rule  holds  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  other  directions  and  also  with  respect  to  the 
winds  that  appear  both  at  the  times  of  conception  and  de* 
livery. f 

14.  If  gentle  and  agreeable  winds  blow  from  the  north, 
north  east  and  east,  if  the  sky  should  be  clear,  if  the  Sun  and 
Mood  should  appear  surrounded  by  bright,  white,  thick  halos  j 

15.  If  the  clouds  should  appear  huge,  bright,  dense,  or 
shaped  like  a  needle  or  a  sword  and  red,  if  the  sky  should  ap¬ 
pear  dark  as  the  crow’s  egg,  if  the  Moon  and  Stars  should 
appear  white  ; 

16.  If  the  twilight  should  be  marked  by  the  rainbow,  by 
the  low  rumbling  roar  of  thunder,  by  lightning,  by  the  mock 
sun  or  parhelion,  if  it  be  of  agreeable  appearance,  if  groups  of 
birds  and  animals  should  sound  sweet  music  from  the  north, 
north  east  and  east  ; 


*  These  stanzas  enable  ns  to  determine  the  particular  fortnight  of  tbo  fall 
of  rain. 

f  This  stanza  enables  us  to  determine  the  direction  of  the  fall  of  rain. 


plyV  BRIHAT  SAM  HIT  A.  ^CH\CD 

l/^/i‘7.  If  the  planets  should  appear  of  large  bright  disc,kj|- 
-ffrcir  course  should  lie  to  the  north  of  the  constellation  if 
they  should  be  free  from  abnormal  affections,  if  the  trees 
should  grow  well  and  be  free  from  disease  ;  if  men  and  cattle 
should  be  happy  *, 


IS.  These  are  indications  of  a  healthy  pregnancy  ;  and 
in  such  Closes  the  clouds  will  yield  abundance  of  rain.  We 
will  now  proceed  to  state  the  indications  of  a  healthy  preg¬ 
nancy  of  rain  clouds  in  the  several  seasons  of  year. 


19.  In  the  months  of  Margasira  mid  Pousha,  if  the  sky 
should  appear  very  rod  just  before  sun-rise  and  just  after  sun¬ 
set  ;  if  the  clouds  should  appear  surrounded  by  halos  ;  if  the 
month  of  Margasira  should  be  found  to  be  very  cold  and  if 
the  fall  of  snow  should  bo  excessive  in  the  month  of  Pousha ; 


20.  In  the  month  of  Magha,  if  strong  winds  should 
blow,  if  the  discs  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  should  be  dimmed  by 
the  fall  of  snow,  if  at  rising  and  setting  the  Sun  should  bo  hid 
by  clouds  and  it  be  then  exceedingly  cold  ; 


2L  In  the  mouth  of  Phalguna  if  strong  and  violent 
winds  should  blow,  if  fine  clouds  should  be  found  marching 
from  place  to  place,  if  broken  or  imperfect  halos  should  appear 
in  the  sky,  if  the  sun  should  appear  of  the  color  of  gold  or  red  ; 

22.  In  the  month  of  Chitra  if  the  sky  should  be  marked 
by  winds,  clouds,  rain  and  halos  ;  in  the  month  of  Vaisakha  if 
there  should  bo  rain,  lightning  and  thick  clouds,  in  all  these 
cases  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  pregnancy  of  the  clouds  is 
a  healthy  one. 


23.  If  the  pregnant  clouds  should  be  of  the  color  of 
pearls  or  silver  or  of  the  color  of  the  hark  of  the  Tam  ala# 
tree  or  of  the  blue  lotus  or  of  collyrium,  they  will  yield 
abuundance  of  rain, 

*  Tamala  .♦  a  tree  with  a  very  dark  bark  and.  with  white  blossom# - 

Xaatho  chyiuua  Pjctorius, 


BRIfXAT  3AMHTTA- 

~V:%4>4^24.  If  t-ho  pregnant  clouds  should  be  exposed  to  the  libi 
fays  of  the  sun,  if  they  should  be  accompanied  by  gentle  winds 
and  appear  as  if  covered  by  drops  of  rain,  they  will  yield 
abundance  of  rain- 

25.  If  the  appearance  of  the  pregnant  clouds  should  be 
marked  by  meteoric  falls,  by  thunder  bolts,  dust  storms  and 
the  appearance  of  mock  tires  about  the  horizon  ;  or  if  at 
the  time  of  such  appearance,  clouds  should  present  the  shape 
of  cities  and  towers  and  if  spots  should  appear  in  the  solar  disc 
or  if  there  should  be  planetary  conjunctions  at  the  time;  or, 
26’  If  there  should  bo  n  shower  of  blood,  if  halos  or 
rain-bows  should  appear  in  the  sky,  j£  thero  should  bo  a  solar 
or  lunar  eclipse  at  the  time,  in  all  these  cases  the  pregnancy 
will  miscarry. 

27.  If  the  symptoms  of  a  healthy  pregnancy  assigned 
for  the  several  seasons  of  the  year  should  fail,  the  pregnancy 
will  miscarry  and  the  clouds  will  yield  little  or  no  rain. 

28.  Clouds  that  conceive  when  the  Moon  is  iu  the  as- 
terisina  of  P.  Bhacferapada,  U.  .Bhadrapada,  P.  Asliadha  and  U» 
Asliadha  and  Rohini  will  yield  abundance  of  rain. 

29.  Clouds  that  conceive  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
asterisms  of  Sat&dhishak,  Aslesha,  Ardra,  Swati  and  Magha 
will  yield  rain  continuously  for  several  days  unless  the  preg¬ 
nancy  should  have  suffered  in  any  of  the  ways  stated  above. 


30-  Clouds  that  conceive  when  the  Moon  is  in  any  one 
of  tho  five  asterisrus  referred  to  in  the  last  stanza  in  the  six 
months  from  Murgasira  to  Vaisakba,  will  yield  rain  respec¬ 
tively  for  8,  6,  10,  24, 20,  and  3  days  continuously. ( 

31.  If  either  the  Sun  or  Moon  should  be  attended  by  a 
malefic  planet  at  the  time  of  conception,  the  subsequent 
rainfall  will  be  marked  by  hail,  thunder,  and  fish.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  either  the  Sun  or  Moon  should  be  attended  by  or 


*  This  euables  us  to  detervniuo  the  duration  of  rain  . 


BKIHAT  SAMHIfA. 


within  view  of  a  benefic  planet  at  till©  time  of  conception 
rainfall  will  be  abundant. 


32.  If  there  should  be  fall  of  heavy  rain  at  the  time  of 
conception,  the  pregnancy  will  miscarry  and  there  will  be  no 
rain.  This  will  be  the  case  only  when  the  quantity  of  rain¬ 
fall  exceeds  one-eighth  of  a  JDrona .* 

33.  L,  owing  to  adverse  planetary  influences,  the  preg¬ 
nant  clouds  should  fail  to  yield  rain  at  the  seasons  descri¬ 
bed,  they  will  do  so  at  the  period  of  the  next  conception  and 
in  such  a  case  the  rain  will  be  mavked  by  a  shower  of  hail. 

34.  If  milch  animals  should  remain  umnilked  for  a  long 
period,  the  milk  will  become  solidified  j  so,  the  rain  which  the 
clouds  fail  to  yield  at  the  proper  season  becomes  congealed 
after  a  time  in  the  sky. 

35.  If  a  healthy  pregnacy  should  be  established  in  the 
five  ways  given  below  (vide  stanza  37),  the  rainfall  will  extend 
to  100  Yojanas  (500  miles)  all  around.  If  one  of  the  five 
indications  he  wanting,  the  extent  will  be  reduced  to  one-half; 
if  two  should  be  wanting,  to  one-fourth,  and  so  forth. 

33.  It  the  pregnancy  should  be  marked  by  all  the  five 
indications,  the  quautifcy  of  subsequent  rainfall  will  be  a  'JDrona; 
if  in  such  a  case  the  rain  should  be  attended  by  strong  winds, 
the  quantity  will  only  be  3  Adhahasf  ;  it*  by  lightning,  the 
quantity  will  be  d  adbakas :  if  then  the  sky  should  be  over 
cast  by  clouds,  the  quantity  of  rainfall  will  ba  9,  Adhakas; 
if  chore  should  be  the  roar  of  thunder  then  12,  adhakas  of  rain 
will  fall. 


37.  The  signs  of  a  healthy  pregnancy  are  winds,  rain, 
lightning,  roar  of  thunder  and  the  appearance  of  clouds  at 
the  time  of  conception ;  in  such  a  case  the  subsequent  rain 


*  A  Dror.a  is  equal  to  200  phalas. 
went  should  be  made  by  means  of  a  rain 
vessel  with  &  mouth,  a  cubit  in  diameter. 


Ihe  Btanza  implies  that  the  measure- 
gauge  'ahich  ought  to  be  a  circular 


t  Adhaka  an  adhaka  is  oue-fourth  of  a  clrona  or  50  phalas* 


BBIUAT  SAMH1TA* 


ill  be  abundant;  bub  if  the  rain  fall  should  be  excessiv 
the  time  of  conception,  there  will  only  boa  poor  drizzling 
shower  during  the  rainy  season. 


This  Chapter  enables  us  to  determine  before  hand  the 
time,  duration,  place,  extent,  quantity  and  quality  of  ram  fall. 
As  rain  is  a  subject  of  vital  importance,  the  value  of  a  fore¬ 
knowledge  of  the  agricultural  prospects  of  the  country  can 
never  be  over  estimated.  The  several  civilized  Governments 
will  therefore  do  well,  having  a  due  respect  for  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  the  ancient  Hindu  Sages,  to  call  upon  their  Meteo¬ 
rological  departments  to  study  this  Chapter  and  Chapters  22 
to  28  and  submit  a  report  on  the  future  prospects  of  t  he  land, 
by  Way  of  testing  the  truth  of  the  statements  above  made. 
Government  Astronomers  may  also  be  directed  to  submit 
similar  reports  on  the  future  condition  of  the  Earth  and  of 
mankind  at  large,  judging  froin  tbe  various  phases  ot  the 
Moon,  courses  and  conjunctions  of  the  planets,  the  appearance 
of  comets  and  so  forth.  This  appears  to  us  to  be  a  wiser  mode 
of  governing  the  country  than  being  takeu  by  surprise  by  the 
actual  occurrence  of  famine  and  drought  and  then  trying  to 
move  Heaven  and  Earth  to  redress  their  miseries — nob  unlike 
the  Turk  Athlete  who,  unable  to  anticipate  the  impending  blow 
of  his  adversary,  raises  his  weapon  in  its  direction  only  after  it 
has  fallen  heavily  every  time. 


BR1HAT  SAM  HIT  A, 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

On  Dharana 
or 

Pun  Support  Days. 

I*  commencing  from  the  eighth  day  in 
the  light  half  of  tho  month  of  Jyeshta—  May  and  June — 
are  known  as  Vayu  Dharana  Pays,  that  is,  days  from  tho 
winds  that  blows  on  which  the  nature  of  tho  health  of  the 
pregnancy  of  the  rain-clouds  might  bo  determined.  If  tho 
winds  should  be  goutle  and  agreeable  and  then,  if  the  sky 
should  be  covered  by  fine,  bright  clouds,  there  will  be  good 
rain. 

2.  But  if,  in  the  said  light  half  of  Jyeshta,  there  should 
be  a  fall  of  rain  in  tho  four  days  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterism  of  from  Swati  to  Jyeshta,  there  will  be 
rain  in  the  rainy  season — from  Sravana  to  Karttika— August 
I  to  November.  °  ,, 

3-  If  the  four  Dharana  days  should  be  exactly  alike  in 
their  indications,  there  will  bo  happiness  in  the  land;  if  dif¬ 
ferent  from  one  another,  there  will  be  misery,  and  there  will 
also  be  h,(M  uom  lobbeis;  wo  have  the  recorded  opinion  of 
V asishta  to  the  same  effect. 

4-  If  on  the  Dharana  days  the  Sun  and  Moon  should  bo 
covered  by  wet  clouds  attended  by  lightning  and  dust  storm, 
there  will  be  good  rain. 

5-  If  on  the  Dharana  days  the  sky  should  be  marked  by 
beautiful  lightning  alternately  appeuring  in  opposite  bonefic 

f  quarters,  every  species  of  crop  will  thrive. 

6.  if  on  the  same  days  there  should  full  a  shower  of 
,-nm  attended  by  dust  storm  or  if  children  should  in  play  blow 
through  their  mouths  or  birds  sing  or  play  in  tho  dust  or  in  . 
water ;  if  the  halos  round  tho  Sun  and  Moon  should  appear 

bright  and  not  much  disfigured  there  will  be  rain  and  all 
crops  will  thrive. 


DRIETA  -  8AMTUTA' 


Uio  Dharnna  days,  the  clouds  should  appear 
■ollected  together  with  their  course  from  left  fco 
will  bo  immediate  rain  and  such  rain  will  be 
xcecdingly  useful  fco  fclio  crops. 


OHAPTKR  XXIII. 

On  Rain. 

1.  Judging  from  the  rain  that  falls  on  the  dry*  when 
the  Moon  passes  from  the  asfcerism  of  P.  Ashadha  to  that  of 
Mu’a  in  the  lunar  month  of  Jyeshta  and  aftor  the  full-moon, 
an  astronomer  should  predict  the  agricultural  condition  of  the 
connfcry  as  well  as  the  quantity  of  rain-fall  in  the  coming 
rainy  season. 


2.  Palling  rain  slionM  bo  collected  in  a  vessel  with  a 
circular  mouth,  a  cubit  in  dhuneter  and  the  col  abed  min 
should  be  measured  with  a  vessel  whose  capacity  is  an  Adha-ka, 
which  is  equal  to  50  phahuns.* 

3.  There  will  bo  continuous  rain  for  ns  many  days  of  tbo 
Moon’s  course  from  P-  Ashadha  onwards  (in  the  rainy  season) 
as  the  number  of  asfcerisms,  through  which  when  the  M  on 
])asses,  h  shower  of  rain  occurs  just  marking  the  Earth, 
from  the  same  asterisk  of  P.  Ashadha  in  the  lunar  month  of 
Jyeshta,  or  there  will  be  rain  for  as  many  days  as  fclio  number 
of  rain  drops  sticking  to  the  edge  of  the  blades  of  grass. 
The  quantity  o»’ subsequent  rain-fall  can  also  be  ascertained 


from  such  raiti.t 

4.  Some  writers  say  that  the  subsequent  rain-full  will 
be  confined  to  the  spot  where  the  lirst  shower  falls;  others 
say  that  the  exteut  of  the  subsequent  ruin-fall  will  bo  10 
Yojanas  50  miles — all  round  ;  but  according  to  Oarga,  Pata- 
sara  and  Vnsisbta  the  extent  is  15J  Yojanas. 

*  larasara  deiincit  an  Adlieka  to  be  the  rapacity  i,f  a-  vessel  with  a 
crcalttr .mn«VaO  inches  h,  diameter  and  whose  depth  is  8  inch*. 

rJ  *"ch  r‘‘st  shw*r  shoUid  00  "wrasive  there  will  be  no  rain  in  the 

Mii.iy  RvaSOfl. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA- 

If  there  should  be  rain  wlien 
through  certain  as f, origins  from  P.  Ashadha 
lunar  month  of  JyesMathen  there  will  also  be  rain  w 
Moon  passes  through  the  same  asterisks  in 
If  there  should  be  no  rain  in  the  month  of 
be  uo  rain  in  the  rainy  season. 


6.  If  there  should  be  a  fall  of  rain  when  the  Moon 
passes  through  the  astorisms  of  Hasta,  P.  A  shad  ft,  Mriga- 
seershn,  Cbitra,  Revati,  and  Sravishta in  the  month  of  Jyeshfca, 
there  will  fall  16  dronas  of  rain  in  the  coining  rainy  season. 
If  thero  should  be  a  fall  when  the  Moon  passes  through  Sata- 
hhhhuls,  Jyeshta,  and  Swati,  in  the  month  of  Jyeshta,  the 
subsequent  rain-fall  will  bo  4  dronas.  If  there  should  be  a  fal  l 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  Krittika,  the  quantity  of 
subsequent  rain-tall  will  be  10  dronas. 

7.  If  there  should  bo  a  fall  of  rain  when  the  Moon 
passes  through  Sravana,  Magha,  Anuradha,  Bharaui  and 
Mnla,  the  quantity  of  subsequent  rain -fall  will  be  14  dronas. 
If  when  through  P.  Phalguni,  the  quantity  will  be  25  dronas; 
if  when  through  Punarvasu,  the  quantity  will  be  20  dronas. 

8.  If  there  should  be  a  fall  of  rain,  when  the  Moon 
passes  through  the  asterisks  of  Visakha  and  U,  Ashadha  in 
the  lunar  month  of  Jyeshta,  the  quantity  of  subsequent  rain¬ 
fall  will  be  20  dronas;  if  when  through  Aalesha,  the  quantity 
will  bo  IS  dronas;  if  when  through  U.  Bhadrapadft,  IJ.  Phal- 
guni  and  Uohini,  the  quantity  will  be  25  dronas. 


9.  If  there  should  be  a  fall  of  rain  when  the  Moon 
passes  through  the  nsterisms  of  P.  Bbadrapada  and  Pushy  a 
in  the  lunar  month  of  Jyeshta,  the  quantity  of  rain-, fall  in 
the  coming  winter  will  be  15  dronas;  if  when  through  As- 
waui,  the  quantity  will  be  12  dronas;  if  when  through  Ardra, 
ic  will  be  Id  dronas.  In  all  the  aboy?  cases  the  subsequent 
raiu-fall  depends  upon  the  asterisks  remaining  unaffected  by 


BTtlHAT  SAMHITA. 


10,  if  the  asterisks  should  Buffer  by  the  meeting*  to¬ 
gether  in  them  of  the  Sun,  Saturn  and  Ketu  (descending  node 
of  the  Moon)  or  by  the  course  of  Mars  through  them  or  by 
meteoric  falls,  comets  or  planetary  conjunctions,  there  will  be 
neither  rain  nor  prosperity  in  the  land  ;  but  if  benefio  planets 
should  pass  through  the  asterisms  or  if  the  asterisms  should 
remain  unaffected  in  any  of  the  ways  described  above,  mam 
kind  will  be  happy. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

On  Rohini  Yoga  * 

1.  The  grove  of  Mount  Meru  was  rendered  agreeable  by 
the  humming  of  bees  sipping  honey  from  the  flowers  of  troes 
growing  between  rocks  of  gold,  by  the  sweet  music  of  birds 
at  play  and  by  the  melodious  voice  of  the  Sylvan  fairies. 

2.  It  was  in  such  a  grove  of  Mount  Meru— the  abode 
of  tho  Devas — that  Nura da  communicated  to  Brihasputi  the 
laws  of  Rohini  Yoga;  the  same  laws  have  since  boon  taught 
by  Garga,  Parasara,  Kasyapa  and  Maya  to  numbers  of  the  ir 
disciples. 

3.  Having  examined  these  truths  I  purpose  to  write 
a  brief  treatise  on  the  same  adopting  the  same  views.f 

4.  It  is  part  of  an  astronomer’s  duty  to  examine  the 
weather  indications  on  tho  day  when  the  Moon  passes  through 

*  Rohini  Yoga :  This  means  the  period  of  a  day  when  tho  Moon  pv  Ze 
through,  the  uaterism  of  Rohini  in  the  dark  hall  of  the  lunar  month  of  Asbauha. 

.  +.Theeo  prefatory  remarks  clearly  show  that  what  follow  aro  important 
scientific  truths  in  tho  oyes  of  Hindu  astronomers :  that  tho  weather  indi¬ 
cations  of  ono  single  clay  in  a  year  should  form  tho  subject  of  go  much 
calculation  with  tho  Hindus  m  determining  tbo  fntnre  agrionltcral  prospect 
of  «he  land  while  to  the  inexperienced  eye  of  a  Western  man  of  science, 
the  day  appears  as  indifferent  or  otherwise  as  any  other  day  of  the  vear 
argues  that  modern  science  is  still  iar  behind  in  her  infestigatiocs  of  the 
laws  of  nature. 


BRIHAT  SAMUTTA, 


BRIHAT  SAMKITA,  [bn. 

SW  n^terism  of  Rob  ini  in  tho  dark  half  of  tho  lunar  month 
**  .^pbutha — June — July — and  to  predict  scientifically  the  future 
condition  of  the  land. 


•k  The  astronomer  should  be  able  to  determine  before 
hand  the  time  of  the  Moon’s  entry  into  the  asterism  of 
Robin  i,  1  have  treated  of  tbis|subject  in  my  work  on  astro¬ 
nomy.  The  astronomer  must  base  his  conclusions  on  the 
nature  of  tho  effects  of  Rohini  yoga,  on  the  size,  gloss,  color 
and  course  of  the  Moon  and  by  tho  appearance  of  any  comets 
or  fall  of  any  meteors  at  Uie  time. 


0.  The  astronomer  shall  choose  a  suitable  station  imme¬ 
diately  to  tho  North-east  of  his  town,  shall  spend*  3  days  in 
the  wot  ship  of  fire ,f  shall  draw  out  a  figure  of.  tho  constella¬ 
tions  with  the  planets  in  thorn  and  shall  worship  it  with 
flowers,  perfumed  smoke  and  by  gifts  and  sacrifices. t 

7.  Re  shall  also  prepare  a  raised  platform,  cover  it  with 
Ku.s:>  grass  and  place  in  tho  four  points — N.  E.  S-  and  W. — 
four  potf§  filled  with  water,  precious  stones  and  modicinal 
herbs,  covering  the  mouths  with  tender  loaves, 

£.  Ho  shall  then  procure  every  species  of  seed,  charm 
them  by  moans  of  the  Mahavrita  Mantra  (referred  to  in  the 
Adharvana  Veda,)  wet  them  with  water  rendered  pure  by 
contact  with  gold  and  kusa  grass  and  gently  put  them  layer 
over  layer  in  a  broad  mouthed  central  pot  and  shall  porform 
huina  in  honor  of  the  Gods  Vayu  (tho  wind),  Varuna  (rain), 
and  Soma  (the  Moon.) 


9-  He  shall,  beforehand,  ascertain  and  mark  out  tho 
several  points  of  tho  compass  and,  planting  vertically  a 
flag  staff— the  stick  being  straight  and  thrice  tho  length  of 


*  Fasting  according  to  Garga. 
f  By  Gayafcri  homa  according  to  tho  same  authority. 

t  According  to  Garga*  the  astronomer  should  observe  these  religious 
ceremonies  on  the  8th  lunar  day  of  the  dark  half  of  As  had  ha, 

§  The  pots  represent  from  the  North  the  four  mouths  from  Sravaua 
to  Kart  i  lea. 


BIUHAT  SAMIHTA 


s^M/cloth.  which  shall  bo  thin,  fine  and  of  black  color —Tie 
ascertain  the  direct  iota  of  the  wind  at  the  time  when  the 
Moon  enters  the  astorism  oFRabinb 


10.  He  shall  divide  the  day  on  which  the  Moon  enters 
the  asterism  of  Rohini  into  8  equal  parts  (of  3  hours  each) 
commencing  from  sun-rise — the  parts  representing  severally 
the  eight  fortnights  of  the  lorn*  months  of  tbo  rainy  season 
from  Sravana  to  Kartika ;  and  he  shall  determine  on  which 
month  or  fortnight  and  how  long  there  will  be  .rain  judging 
from  the  direction  and  duration  of  the  wind.  If  the  wind 
should  blow  from  left  to  right  ther  e  will  be  prosperity  in  the 
land  ;  if  it  should  blow  in  some  fixed  direction,  people  living 
in  that  direction  will  be  happy.* 


11.  After  the  Moon  Las  passed  through  Rohini,  the 
astronomer  shall  examine  the  seeds;  those  that  boar  sprout* 
will  thrive  well  in  the  year  and  the  quantity  that  will  bo  har¬ 
vested  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  that  have 
sprouted,  in  the  case  of  each  species  of  seed. 

12.  After  the  Moon  has  passed  through  the  asterism  of 
Rohini,  if  there  should  bo  heard  in  every  direction  the  sweet 
sound  of  birds  and  of  animals,  if  tho  sky  should  be  clear  and 
the  wind  agreeable  there  will  be  prosperity  m  the  laud.  We 
shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  effects  of  winds  and  clouds. 


13.  If,  on  the  Rohini  yoga  day,  huge  clouds,  serpent¬ 
like  in  shape,  should  appear  white-black  in  certain  parts  of 
tbo  sky,  white  in  certain  parts  and  black  in  certain  other 
parts  with  tho  lightning  for  their  tongues  and  if  the  clouds 
should  bo  collected  and  appear  twisted  together; 

14.  If  they  should  appear  of  the  color  of  the  nut  of  tho 
lotus,  ii  their  neighbourhood  should  be  illumined  by  the  light 
of  the  Sun,  if  clouds  of  various  hues  should  fill  tho  sky  or  if 


*  According  to  Garga  the  day  alone,  and  not  tho  night,  should  bo  divided 
into  four  equal  parts  to  represent  the  four  months  of  the  rainy  reason  and  tho 
observation  yhould  alao  be  made  during^TSSy. 


}||]  BRIHAT  8AMFFITA.  [CH. 

should  appear  of  tlio  color  of  the  bee,  of  crimson  or  or 
the  flower  of  Kimsuka  ;* 

15.  If  the  sky  should  bo  full  of  black  clouds  and  if  it  bo 
marked  by  lightning  or  beautiful  rainbow  thus  presenting 
the  appearance  of  a  forest  full  of  elephants,  buffaloes  and 
wild  fire  > 

16.  If  tho  clouds  appear  like  black  mountaius  or  rocks 
or  if  their  color  should  resemble  that  of  tho  snow,  pearls, 
oench  shells,  and  tho  Moou  ; 

17.  Or  if  the  clouds  should  be  like  elephants - with 

tho  lightning  for  the  rope  of  gold,  tho  flying  cranes  for  the 
tips  of  thoir  tusks,  tho  rain  for  their  juice  (ichor),  their  sides 
moving  like  the  sides  of  the  elephants,  with  the  rainbow  for 
thoir  flags  of  various  hues,  their  dark  color  resembling  that  of 
the  bark  of  tho  tarnala  tree  and  tho  bee  j 

18-  If,  immediately  before  sun-rise  and  after  sun-sot, 
the  clouds  should  appear  of  tho  color  of  the  blue  lotus  and, 
with  the  lightning,  resemble  the  dark  Vishnu  dressed  in  cloth 
of  gold  j 

10.  If  there  should  be  heard  the  sound  of  the  peacock, 
of  chafcnka  and  of  the  frog,  together  with  the  roar  of  thunder 
clouds  filling  the  whole  of  the  visible  sky  ; 

20.  If  the  sky  should  be  overcast  by  clouds  as  describ¬ 
ed  above  for  3  days  or  2  days  or  a  single  day,  there  will  bo 
abundance  of  rain  and  mankind  will  be  happy. 

21-  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  clouds  should  be  of  dis¬ 
agreeable  appearance,  of  small  size,  and  dispersed  by  the 
wind  or  if  they  should  be  of  the  shape  of  the  camel,  the  crow, 
dead  bodies,  tho  monkey  and  the  likot  aud  if  they  should 
at  the  same  time  remain  mute,  there  will  be  no  rain  and  man¬ 
kind  will  not  bo  happy. 

♦  Kimsufc*  .*  the  treo  Butoa  Frondosa,  a  tree  bearing  beautiful  red  bloe- 
some  known  in  Tamil  as  utor*. 

|  Like  rata,  dogs,  &c„  according  to  commentator. 


BRIHAT  SAMHIXjit 


12 


W22.  Ifi  on  the  Rohini  Yoga  day.  the  sky  should  be  cleai 
kmi  without  clouds  and  the  Sun  exceedingly  hot,  there  will 
be  rain  in  the  rainy  season.  If  cm  the  night  of  the  Yoga  day, 
the  sky  with  its  glittering  stars  should  resemble  a  tank  with 
its  lilies,  there  will  also  bo  rain. 

23.  If  on  the  Roliini  Yoga  day,  clouds  should  first  ap¬ 
pear  in  the  East,  crops  will  thrive  well.  If  they  should 
appear  in  the  South-east,  destructive  fires  will  afflict  man¬ 
kind  ;  if  in  the  South,  the  crops  will  suffer  blight  ;  if  in  the 
South  east,  oue  half  of  the  crops  will  suffer  and  if  in  the 
West,  there  will  be  good  rain. 

24.  If  the  clouds  should  appeal'  in  the  North-west  there 
will  bo  rain  in  some  places  and  .such  rain  will  be  attended  by 
the  wind  ;  if  they  should  appear  in  the  North,  there  will  ho 
good  rain  and  if  in  the  North-east,  crops  will  thrive.  The 
same  effects  are  to  be  assigned  to  the  winds  blowing  from  the 
several  quarters. 

25.  If  on  tiio  Rohini  Yoga  day  there  should  be  meteoric 
falls,  lightning,  thunderbolts,  mock  fires,  and  cometary  nnd 
other  unusual  appearances,  or  if  there  should  be  earthquakes' 
or  if  the  sounds  of  birds  and  animals  should  be  hoarse  and 
disagreeable  there  will  be  no  rain  and  mankind  will  not  be 
happy. 


26.  If,  on  examining,  the  waters  of  the  four  pots  from 
the  north  representing  the  four  months  from  Sravnna  should 
be  found  Tull  there  will  be  good  rain  in  the  several  months  ; 
if  in  any  pot  the  water  should  have  oozed  out  completely, 
there  will  be  no  rain  in  the  month  it  represents  and  if  in  corn- 
pletely,  there  will  bo  a  proportionate  decrease  in  the  quantity 
of  the  rainfall. 


27.  If  it  should  be  desired  to  ascertain  the  fate  of  ony 
sovereign  or  country  during  the  year,  there  should  be  placed 
fresh  pots  each  to  represent  a  sovereign  or  a  country.  If  ou 
examining,  any  of  these  pots  should  be  found  split  or  broker. 


URIITAT  SAMtllTA- 


or  the  country  represented 
the  water  should  have  disappeared, 
Suffer  and  it  full,  they  rvill  bo  happy. 


will  suffer 
then  also 


rn  i  series  ; 
they  will 


28.  If  the  course  of  the  Moon  should  lie  to  the  South  of 
the  stars  of  the  Rohini  group  whether  nenr  or  for,*  mankind 
will  he  afflicted  with  miseries. 


Id).  It  the  Moon  should  pass  just  touching  the  Northern 
most  star  of  the  group,  there  will  be  good  rain,  but  there  will 
also  bo  miseries;  if  she  should  pass  to  the  north  of  the  group 
Hiul.  not  in  contact  with  it  there  will  bo  abundant  rain  and 
mankind  will  be  happy. 

oO.  If  the  Moon  should  enter  the  Ilohini  group  and  pass 
through  its  centre,  mankind  will  be  rendered  helpless  and, 
troubled  by  the  ci  i.es  of  children  for  food,  they  will  travel  to 
foreign  lands,  drinking  the  waters  of  muddy  pools  from  their 
broken  howls. 


•  1.  If  on  the  night  of  the  Rohini  Yoga  day  the  Moon 
should  rise  firstf  and  the  group  immediately  next  after  it, 
there  will  bo  happiness  in  the  land  and  women  will  become 
amorous  and  subject  to  the  influence  of  men. 

d2.  If  on  the  other  hand  the  Rohini  group  should  rise 
fiivt  and  the  Moon  next  after  it,J  men  will  become  amorous 
and  subject  to  the  influence  of  women. 


do-  If  on  the  night  of  the  Yoga  day  the  Moon  at  rising 
should  bo  found  to  tho  South-east  of  the  group,  mankind  will 
suffer  miseries ;  il  she  should  be  found  to  tho  South-west  of 
the  group,  crops  will  suffer  injuries  in  various  ways;  if  on 
the  M  eat  and  North-west  tho  growth  of  tho  crop3  will  be 
moderate  ;  and  if  in  the  North-east  tho  crops  will  thrive. 


*  This  will  unusually  be  the  case  astronomically,  accordin''  to  com- 
inent&tor.  ° 

t  That  is,  if  tho  Moon’*  conjunction  with  liohini  should  take  place  imme¬ 
diately  after  rig i tig. 

I  That  is,  if  the  conjunction  should  hare  taken  place  immediately  before 
rising. 


BltrilAT  fUMHTTA. 


12 


If  on  the  Yoga  dav,  the  Moon  should  pass  in  contact 
wren  the  Yogatara#  junction  star)  of  the  group,  mankind 
■will  bo  tormented  with  various  fears;  if  the  Yogatara  should 
be  eclipsed  by  the  Moon,  the  reigning  sovereign  [will  be 
assassinated  by  a  woman. 


.’5.  If,  towards  nightfall,  on  the  Rohini  Yoga  day, 
when  cattle,  led  out  in  the  morning,  re-enter  the  town,  the 
first  animal  so  entering  should  bo  either  an  ox  or  a  goat, 
there  will  bo  abundant  rain;  if  it  should  be  an  animal  black- 

white  in  color  there  will  be  moderate  rain - if  in  the  last 

case  the  Mark  color  should  predominate  the  rainfall  will  bo 
abundant  and  if  the  white  color  should  predominate  there  will 
be  no  rain.  If  the  animal  that,  enters  first  should  ibe  of  any 
other  color  there  will  bo  slight  rain  f 


3(>.  If  on  the  Robini  Yoga  clay,  the  Moon  should  bo 
rendered  invisible  by  the  intervention  of  thick  clouds,  man¬ 
kind  will  suffer  from  severe  diseases  ;  but  there  will  be 
abundant  rain  and  crops  will  thrive. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

On  Swati  Yoga.J 

1.  All  that  has  been  said  with  redpoct  to  Robini  Yoga 
apply  to  both  Swati  and  Asliadi  Y<  gas;§  but  in  the  present 
chapter  we  shall  only  slate  cerfcofin  special  effects  connected 
with  Swati  Yoga. 

*  Yogatora:  This  is  generally  the  brightest  oi  the  ‘rronp. 

f  These  views  accord  with  these  of  Garga,  but  Purftnara  adds  : 

If  * * * §xi  elephant,  a  hoine  or  a  chariot  should  enter  the  town  first  in  the 
evening  of  the  Echini  Yoga  day,  there  will  be  success  in  war ;  if  a  monkey, 
an  ass,  a  camel,  a  mongoose,  a  cat  or  a  dog  should  so  enter  there  will  be 
rroubleg.  if  a  iilindman  should  enter  first.,  there  will  be  fear  from  thimrie;- 
bolts. 

+  Swati  Yoga:  This  means  the  period  of  a  day  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  tin  asteriBiti  of  Swati  in  the  month  of  Ashadha. 

§  Vide  Chapter  26. 


17 


BRIITAT  PAKHITA. 


[CH.  2 


2.  Dividing  both  the  day  and  night  of  the  Swati  Yogf 
%y  each  into  three  equal  parts,  if  at  night  there  should  bo  a 
fall  of  rain  during  the  first  division,  all  the  crops  will  flour¬ 
ish  ;  if  during  the  second  division,  gingolly,  kidney  bean  and 
black  gram  will  thrive  and  if  during  the  third  division,  the 
crops  of  Grceshma  will  thrive  and  those  Sarat  will  perish. 


3.  If  there  should  be  a  full  of  rain  during  the  first 
division  of  the  day,  there  will  be  abundant  rain  iu  winter; 
the  same  remark  applies  to  the  second  and  third  divisions; 
but  in  these  two  cases  worms  and  Serpents  will  afflict,  man¬ 
kind.  If  there  should  be  a  fall  of  rain  throughout  the  day 
and  night  there  will  bo  uninterrupted  raiu  for  several  days 
in  winter. 


4.  To  the  duo  north  of  Cliitra*  there  is  a  star  known  as 
Apam  Vatsa.  It’  the  Moon  should  pass  near  it  mankind  will 
|  be  happy. 

If  there  should  be  a  fall  of  snow  on  the  dark  night 
of  the  seventh  lunar  day  of  the  dark  half  of  the  month  of 

Maglia - January  and  February,  or  if  a  strong  wind  should 

blow  or  if  dripping  clouds  should  roar  uninterruptedly  or  if 
there  should  be  constant  lightning  or  if  the  Sun,  Moon  and 
Stars  should  be  wholly  concealed  by  the  clouds,  mankind  will 
be  happy  and  crops  will  thrive, 

G.  The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  Swati  Yogas  occur- 
ing  in  the  mouths  of  Phalguna  (February  and  March) 
Chaitra  (March  and  April)  and  Vaisakha  (April  and  May.) 
But  of  the  Swati  Yogas,  that  occurring  in  the  month  of  Asha- 
dha  (June  and  July)  is  the  most  important. 


*  At  a  distance  of  about  5* 


20.] 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


BRIHAT  PAM  HIT  A. 


1 


Oh  Ashadhi  Yoga;* 


1.  On  the  clay  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
astorism  of  TJ*  Ashadha  in  tho  lunar  month  of  Ashadha,  th« 
Jyoutishaka  shall  weigh  quantities  of  all  seeds  ;  if  on  weigh 
ing  them  again  on  tho  next  day,  any  seeds  should  bo  found 
to  weigh  more,  those  crops  will  flourish;  if  they  should  bo 
fouud  to  weigh  less*  they  will  not  grow  at  all.  There  are 
mantras  to  be  addressed  to  the  weighing  machine  while 
weighing. 

2.  Minerva,  Goddess  of  Truth,  thou  art  deserving  of 
praise.  Thou  art  now  going  to  show  that  which  is  truth. 
0  Truth,  thou  art  ever  truthful* 

3.  O  Truth  by  whoso  might  the  San,  the  Moon,  tho 
planets  and  the  stars  rise  in  the  East  and  set  in  the  West, 
thou  wilt  show  now, 

4*  That  truth  which  is  in  all  the  Vedas,  that  truth  which 
is  spoken  of  by  thoso  that  know  Brahma  and  that  truth 
which  is  to  bo  found  in  the  three  worlds ; 

f>.  Thou  art  the  daughtor  of  Brahma;  thou  art  sung  as 
Aditya;  thy  Gotra  (family)  name  is  Kusyapee  and  thy  simple 
name  is  Tula  (weighing  machine.) 

6*  The  Jyoutishaka  shall  take  two  square  pieceB  of 
white  silk,  the  side  being  six  inches  long,  and  attach  the 
four  ends  of  each  to  the  ends  of  four  strings  each  ten  incho3 
long  ;  tho  length  of  the  string  attached  to  the  middle  of  the 
beam  shall  bo  six  incites. 

7.  He  shall  put  gold  weights  in  the  Southern  (right) 
scale  and  the  several  articles  to  bo  weighed  in  the  Northern 

*  This  means  the  period  of  a  day  when  tho  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  U.  Ashadha  in  tho  lunar  month  of  Ashadha— Juno,  July, 


BKJIUT  S  .  -*rru. 


*calo;  waters  to  bo  weighed  shall  also  bo  put*  into  tlri 
-rforthorri  scale  ;  if  well  water  should  be  found  to  weigh  more 
'Vi i^n  weighed  th  next  day,  there  will  bo  ho  rain  in  winter; 
il  rain  water  should  weigh  more  there  will  be  moderate  rain  ; 
it  tank  or  lake  water  should  weigh  more  there  will  be  abun¬ 


dant  ram* 


8.  The  condition  of  elephants  shad  br  determined  by 
(weighing)  their  tusks  ;  that  of  cows  and  horses  by  their 
hair;  that  of  princes  by  gold,  that  of  Brahmins  and  others 
by  wax  ;  that  of  countries,  years,  months  and  days  shall  also 
bo  determined  by  fcho  whx,  and  that  of  other  articles  by  the 
art  idea  themsel  ves* 

A*  Gold  is  the  best  material  for  making  the  boam  of  the 
balance;  silver  is  of  middle  importance  ;  if  these  two  cannot 
be  bad,  the  beam  may  be  of  blaokwood  ;  it  may  also  be  of 
that  arrow  iron  which  was  employed  in  killing  a  man.  The 
length  of  the  beam  shall  be  twelve  inches.* 

10*  That  article  which  should  be  found  to  weigh  less 
when  weighed  again  will  perish ;  that  which  weighs  more 
will  flourish ;  that  which  weighs  neither  more  nor  less  will 
neiiher  perish  nor  decay.  These  are  the  secret  laws  relating 
to  the  balanoo  and  these  may  also  bo  followed  on  the  occasion 
uf  the  Rohini  Yoga  day  f 

1 1.  In  the  Swati,  Ashadhi  and  Rohitii  Yogas,  if  the 
Moon  should  bo  accompanied  by  malefic  planets,  there  will  bo 
misery  iu  the  land.  If  on  account  of  the  intervention  of  the 
intercalary  lunar  month,  tho  Yoga  day  should  occur  twice,  the 
observation  shall  be  made  on  both  tho  days  and  the  effect* 
whether  good  or  bad  will  bo  doubled. 

*  An  inch  is  tho  tfp&ce  covered  over  by  8  grains  of  barley  placed  tddo  by 
side  -  or  that  of  8  grains  of  barley  placed  longth-wino.  It  is  also  the  breadth 
of  the  human  tinker, 

f  Alao  oh  tho  Svrati  Yo^a  day  according  to  commcidator. 


B&IHAT  BAMHITA. 


1 


,  l 2.  IE  tho  observations  of  the  three  Yogas  point 
^fleets  of  the  same  character'  ilie  prediction  may  bo  made 
without  hesitation;  hut  if  tho  effects  are  different,  those  of 
Iiohini  Yoga  should  be  adopted. 


Id.  If  on  tho  Yog\  day  tho  wind  should  blow  from  the 
East,  Southeast,  South,  &a,  there  will  be  growth  of  crops, 
fear  from  destructive  fires,  alight  rain,  moderate  rain,  abun¬ 
dant  rain,  excessive  rain  attended  by  storms,  good  rain, 
and  excellent  rain  respectively. 


14.  IE  there  should  be  min  on  the  fourth  lunar  day  of 
the  dark  half  immediately  following  tho  Ashadhi  yoga  day 
when  the  Moon  is  in  the  asterism  of  l\  Ashadha,  the  rainy 
season  will  be  a  prosperous  one  but  not  otherwise. 


J5.  If  on  tho  Pull-Moon  Ashadhi  yoga  day,  tho  wind 
should  blow  from  the  North-east  after  sunset,  crops  will  flourish. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

On  thk  Winds* 

1.  If,  immediately  after  sunset,  and  on  the  Ashadi  yoga 
day,  there  should  blow  tho  East  wind,  fresh  from  its  contact 
with  the  waves  of  the  east  sea,  wanned  by  tho  rays  of  the 
setting  sun  and  cooled  by  tho  rays  of  the  rising  moon,  the  rainy 
season  will  bo  marked  by  dark  dense  clouds  in  all  directions  ; 
aud  tho  crops  of  autumn  and  of  spring  will  flourish. 

2.  If  then  there  should  blow  the  South  east  wind  from 
tho  Malayachala  hills,  there  will  be  fear  from  destructive  fires 
every  where  and  the  Earth  will  bo  covered  with  tho  ashes  of 
objects  consumed  by  such  fires. 

3.  If  then  there  should  blow  the  South  wind  through 
forests  in  tho  branches  of  whoso  trees  tho  monkeys  swing  as 
they  a;v  moved  by  tho  wind,  tho  clouds,  being  forced  by  tho 


ras,  will  yield  ns  little  rain  as  the  elephant  yi 


I>RTHAT  SAMHITA. 


uioe  of  rut  when  struck  with  the  driver’s  hook  or  a  miser  his 


wealth  when  well-beaten. 

4.  If,  immediately  after  sunset  on  the  Ashadhi  yoga 
day,  there  should  blow  the  South-west  wind,  sweeping  into 
the  sea  the  cardamom  and  clove  fruits,  the  Earth  will  be 
filled  with  the  bones  of  those  that  die  from  want  of  food  and 
drink  and  the  appearance  of  the  Earth  will  resemble  that  of  a 
young  lady  just  losing  her  husband. 

5»  If  then  the  West  wind  should  blow  raising  up  dust 
clouds  from  the  grout  d,  crops  will  flourish;  the  chief  rulers 
will  engage  in  war  and  the  Earth  will  be  covered  with  the 
blood  and  flesh  of  those  that  are  killed  in  battle. 

6.  If  immediately  after  sunset  on  the  Ashadhi  yoga  day, 
the  North-west  wind  should  blow  strong  and  fast,  the  Earth 
v/ill  put  on  a  smiling  and  happy  appearance  from  excellent 
w\in,  frogs  will  be  heard  croaking  in  all  directions ;  there  will 
be  one  unbroken  scene  of  green  crops  everywhere  as  far  as 
the  eye  can  reach  and  perfect  prosperity  will  reign  over  tho 


land. 


7.  If  at  the  time  when  tho  Greeshma  season  just  comes 
to  a  close* * * §,  the  North  wind  should  blow  charged  with  the 
odour  , of  the  fragrant  flowers  of  the  Kadambaf  tree,  the  Earth 
will  be  covered  with  water  from  clouds  whose  various  hues  will 
appear  beautiful  by  the  light  of  lightning,  the  Moon  being 
invisible  at  the  same  time. 

8.  If  tli6  cool  North-east  wmd’should  blow  aloud,  being 
felt  agreeable  by  the  Devas  themselves,  and  charged  with  the 
odour  of  tho  flowers  of  Punnaga.f  of  Agaru§  and  of  Parijata|| 

*  i»st  after  sunset  on  the  full  moon  day  of  the  lunar  mouth  of 

Ashadha. 

t  The  tree  Nanclea  ICadamba,  a  tree  with  orange  colored  fragrant  blos¬ 
soms. 

t  Punnaga  *  ramo  of  a  tree,  Rolllevia  Tinctoria  (from  the  blossoms  of 
which  a  yellowish  dye  is  prepared.) 

§  A^nrn  :  Asrelloehum,  Amyria  Agallocha  (alroady  explained). 

||  Parijata  ;  Tho  coral  tree. 


BKIHAT  SAM  HIT  A* 


will  bo  good  ruin  and  crops  will  flourish  ;  mankind  wtlr 
ve  under  the  protection  of  good  rulers  triumphant  over  their 
enemies. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

On  Immediate  Rain. 

1.  If,  iittho  rainy  season  when  the  astrologer  is  ques¬ 
tioned  about  rain,  the  Moon  should  be  in  one  of  the  watory 
signs*  and  if  that  sign  should  at  the  same  time  be  either  the 
rising  sign  or  the  fourth,  the  seventh  or  the  tenth  sign  from  it, 
it  being  then  the  light  half  of  the  month,  there  will  be  abund¬ 
ance  of  immediate  rain  ;  if  it  be  the  dark  half  of  the  month 
and  the  Moon  in  one  of  the  watery  signs  and  within  sight  of 
benefic  planets,  there  will  also  be  abundance  of  immediate 
rain ;  if,  in  the  latter  case,  the  Moon  should  be  within  sight  of 
malefic  planets,  there  will  be  slight  rain.  The  same  rules  ap¬ 
ply  to  Venus  as  to  the  Moon. 

2.  If  the  questioner,  at  the  time  should  happen  to  touch 
a  wet  substance  or  any  substance  one  of  the  meanings  of 
whoso  name  is  water  or  if  lie  should  bo  at  the  time  close  to 
water  or  engaged  in  work  connected  with  water  or  if  at  the 
time  the  word  ‘  water 9  should  bo  heard  from  anybody,  im¬ 
mediate  rain  may  safely  be  predicted. 

3.  If,  in  the  rainy  season,  the  rising  sun  should 
appear  dazzling  or  of  the  color  of  molten  gold  or  glossy  or 
bright  as  the  cat’s  eye  (gem)  or  if  the  mid-day  Sun  should  be 
felt  exceedingly  hot,  there  will  be  raiu  that  day  before  Sun¬ 
set* 

4.  If,  in  the  rainy  season,  the  water  should  be  without 
flavor  or  the  sky  of  the  color  of  the  cow’s  eye  or  clear  and 

*  Watery  Signs  :  These  are  Kataka  (cancer),  Kumbha  (Aquarius),  Meona 
(  riaces),  fcholatt  r  half  of  Kanuya  (Virgo)  and  of  Alakara  (Caprice mus). 


13  HI  HAT  &AMII1TA. 


/out  clouds  or  if  salt  should  turn  into  water  or  if  the  color 
W  the  sky  should  bo  that  of  the  crow’s  egg  or  if  tho  atmos¬ 
phere  should  be  still  and  no  wind  should  blow  or  if  the  fish 
should  be  found  to  jump  from  water  on  the  bank  or  if  tho 
frog  should  h  '  heard  to  croak  iucessantly,  there  will  bo  imme¬ 
diate  rain. 


h.  If  the  cat*  should  be  found  to  scratch  the  ground 
with  its  claws,  if  metallic  dross  should  bo  found  to  be  of  bad 
smelt  or  ii  children  should  erect  banks  and  bridges  in  the 
street  with  earth  out  of  play,  there  will  he  immediate  rain- 


6*  If  mountains  should  appear  black  like  colly rium,  if 
the  oaves  should  be  felt  very  warm  or  if  tho  lunar  halo 
fthould  appear  like  the  color  of  the  eye  of  the  cock,  there 
will  bo  immediate  rain. 


7.  If  tho  ant,  when  undisturbed  and  of  its  own  accord, 
should  leav  e  its  hole  with  its  egg,  if  serpents  should  be  found 
\.o  copulate  or  to  climb  up  trees,,  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 


8.  If  tho  blood-sucker  (lacorta  cmtata)  should  be  found 
to  stare  at  the  sky  from  the  tops  of  trees,  or  if  cows  should 
raise  up  their  heads  and  luok  at  the  Sun  there  will  be  imme¬ 
diate  rain. 


9*  If  the  sheep  should  be  found  reluctant  to  go  out,  if 
they  should  shake  their  ears  or  kick  with  their  legs  or  if  dogs 
should  be  found  to  do  the  s  .me,  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 

10  It  dogs  should  be  found  to  get  to  tho  tops  of  houses, 
if  they  should  look  at  the  sky  all  round,  or  if  during  the  day 
lightr  ing  should  appear  in  the  North-east,  their  will  bo  imme¬ 
diate  ruin  and  the  Earth  will  be  covered  with  water. 

11*  If  tho  Mo  n  sLould  be  of  the  color  of  the  eye  of  a 
parrot  or  a  dove  or  of  tho  Color  of  honey  or  if  the  mock-moon 
should  be  green,  there  will  bo  immediate  rain. 


MKIIUT  SAMHITA* 


S^^2.  If  tho  sound  of  thunder  should  bo  heard  at  night,  alia 
tr^'ntnieg,  red  and  straight  like  a  rod,  should  appear  during 
the  day,  or  if  the  cool  east  wind  should  blow,  there  will  bo  im¬ 
mediate  rain. 


13.  If  the  tender  leaves  of  plants  and  creepers  should  bo 
found  to  grow  with  their  heads  pointed  to  tho  sky,  if  birds 
should  be  found  to  bathe  in  watery  particles  or  if  serpents 
should  be  found  to  rest  on  grass  blades,  there  will  bo  immedi¬ 
ate  rain. 


11.  If  the  clouds  which  appear  at  sun-rise  Or  at  sun-.set 
should  bo  of  the  color  of  the  peacock,  parrot,  tho  blue  jay  or 
chat  aka  (arenlua  inelanoleucus),  if  they  should  be  as  glossy  as 
the  China  rose  or  tbo  lotus  or  if  they  should  be  of  the  shape  of 
undulating  waves,  of  mountains,  of  crocodiles,  of  a  tortoise,  of 
the  boar  or  of  the  fish,  and  i  f  they  should  float  layer  over  layer, 
there  will  bo  immediate  rain, 

15.  If,  all  round,  the  clouds  should  appear  white  like  chalk 
or  tho  moon  and  in  the  centre  black  like  colly  riant  or  tho  beo 
and  glossy,  if  they  should  be  of  various  shapes  and  dripping 
drops  of  rain  and  presenting  the  appearance  of  a  flight  of 
stops,  if  tiiey  should  appear  in  the  JEasfc  and  move  towards 
tho  West  or  appear  in  the  West  and  move  towards  tho  East 
the  re  will  be  immediate  rain. 

10.  If  at  the  time  of  sun-rise  or  sun-set,  there  should  bo 
seen  in  the  sky  the  rainbow,  cl  ouds-rod  like  in  shape,  the  mock 
sun  or  parhelion  or  the  appearance  known  as  Rohita  (straight 
rainbow),  or  lightning  or  halo,  there  will  be  abundanco  of 
immediate  raiu. 


1 7.  If  at  the  time  of  sun-rise  or  sun-set  the  sky  should 
be  of  the  Color  of  the  wings  of  the  partridge,  or  if  there  should 
be  heard  the  sound  of  birds  at  play,  there  will  bo  immediate 
rain  and  such  ruin  will  continue  through  out  the  day  and 
night. 

18 


BRIHAT  SA M$m* 


[CH. 

IS.  Tf  ftt  tho  time  of  sun-set,  the  white  straight  raysf 
of  tho  5*nn  should  shoot  out  as  if  they  formed  so  many  out¬ 
stretched  arms  of  tho  western  ghauts  and  if  clouds  about  the 
horizon  should  then  begin  to  roar,  there  will  be  abundance 
of  rain. 


iO.  If,  in  winter,  the  Moon  should  be  in  the  seventh 
bouse  from  Venus  and  within  view  of  benefit;  planets,  or 
if  she  should  be  in  the  Oth,  6th  or  7th  house  from  Saturn  (also 
within  view  of  benefio  planets)  there  will  be  immediate  rain. 

V  V  Generally  there  will  be  rain  at  tho  periods  of  heliacal 
thing  and  setting  of  the  planets,  planetary  conjunctions,  of 
new  and  fall  moons,  when  the  Sun  is  at  the  end  of  his  ayuna 
(course  to  the  North  or  South)  and  when  the  Sun  is  in  the 
a&Umstn  of  Ardra.* 

21.  There  will  bo  rain  if  Mercury  and  Venus,  or  Mercury 
c:ul  Jupitov,  or  Venus  and  Jupiter  should  meet;  if  Saturn  and 
*Vl '  “  Taeot  and  if  they  should  not  be  accompanied  by 

or  w  ithin  vi  w  of  benefio  planets  there  will  bo  fear  from 
storms  and  tire. 

^  panels  should  bo  close  to  the  Sun,  either  all 
to  its  east  or  all  to  its  west  the  rain  fall  will  be  so  great  that 
the  earth  will  be  buried  under  one  sea  of  water. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

On  Flow krs  anjd  Plants. 

1  JuJSin£  f{  m  the  growth  of  the  fruits  and  flowers  of 
liens  and  plants  we  may  determine  beforehand  what  articles 
can  bo  had  cheap  and  in  abundance  and  what  crops  will  thrive. 

J*  K  tlie  SaIa+  tree  should  bear  fruits  and  flowers,  Ka- 
rnma  (white  rice)  will  grow  in  abundance;  if  the  red  Asoka 


pom  a<  at  tho  20th  of  Jon®  to  tho  3rU  of  Jalv 
Ottw.  "h^UrP  iOt,0f  b0‘#nl,-;“  lna"'  Va*  glowry  «  the  en.l 


BSIHA.T  8AMHITX. 

Id  bear  fruits  and  flowers  red  paddy  will  grow ;  if  tfo 
fsbeerika  should  bear  fruits  and  flowers  white  paddy  w  ill  grow 
and  if  the  black  Asoka  should  bear  fruits  and  flowers  black 
rice  will  grow. 


3.  The  growth  of  the  Nyagrodha  (the  Banyan  ireo) 
indicates  the  growth  of  Yava  (barley)  ;  the  growth  of  Tinduka 
indicates  the  growth  of  tho  Shashtyka  rice;  and  tlxo  growth 
of  the  Aswatta  indicates  the  growth  of  all  crops. 

4.  Tho  growth  of  the  Jamba  (the  rose  apple)  tree  indi¬ 
cates  the  growth  of  the  gingelly  and  black  gram  ;  the  growth 
of  Sireesha  indicates  the  growth  of  the  Kang  a  ;  the  growth 
of  Mudhuka  indicates  the  growth  of  wheat  and  the  growth  of 
the  £aptaparna  indicates  the  growth  of  the  barley. 

5.  The  growth  of  Atimuktaka  (mountain  ebony)  and 
that  of  Kunda  (cassia)  indicate  the  growth  of  Kat-pasa 
(cotton)  ;  tho  growth  of  Asana  indicates  the  growth  of  Sar- 
ahapa  mustard  (plant);  the  growth  of  Badari  (Jajube  tree) 
indicates  tho  growth  of  Kuluttha,  and  the  growth  of  Ch inbiha 
indicates  tho  growth  of  tho  Mudga. 


6.  If  tho  Atasi  (common  flax),  Vetnea  (the  ratan)  and 
palasa  trees  should  bear  blossoms,  Kodrava  will  thrive  ;  if 
Tilaka  should  bear  blossoms,  conch  shells,  pearls  and  silver 
can  be  had  in  abundance  and  if  Inguda  should  bear  blossoms, 
Sana  (hemp)  will  thrive. 


7.  The  growth  of  Hasti  Kama  (castor  oil-W’ee)  shows  that 
elephants  will  thrive  ;  that  of  Aswa  Kama  shows  that  horses 
will  thrive ;  that  of  Patala  (trumpet  flower)  fthows  that  cows 
will  thrive  and  tho  growth  of  plantains  shows  that  goats  and 
sheep  will  thrive. 

8.  If  the  Champaka  should  bear  blossoms,  gold  can  be 
had  in  aboundance  ;  if  the  Bandhujeevaka  should  bear  blos¬ 
soms  corals  can  b©  had  in  abundauce,  if  Kuravaka  should  bear 


brihat  samhita. 


®anu>nds  on  a  be  had  in  abundance  and  if 
vnrta  should  bear  blossoms,  cafcVeyo  (gem)  can 
abundance. 


r,«L 

Nanqfca- 
be  had  in 


The  growth  of  the  Sindhuvara  indicates  that  pearls 
can  be  had  in  abundance;  that  of  Ktisu mbha  (Safflo werj  indi¬ 
cates  that  Knmkuvmi  can  be  bad  in  abundance,  that  of  the  red 
lotus  indicates  that  rulers  will  prosper  and  that  of  the  blue 
lotos  indicates  that  ministers  wilt  prosper. 


10.  If  Suvarnapnshpa  (the  globe  amaranth)  should 
blossom,  Merchants  will  prosper;  if  the  lotus  should  blossom, 
tin  Brahmins  will  prosper,  if  the  white  water  lily  should 
blossom,  priests  will  prosper  and  if  Sougandhika  (the  blue  tolu*) 
should  blossom  the  Commanders  of  armies  will  prosper  and  if 
tho  Arka  plant  should  blossom,  gold  will  become  cheap. 


11.  If  the  Mango  should  thrive  well,  there  will  be  pros¬ 
perity  in  the  land  ;  if  Bhallata  (marking  nut  plant)  should 
thrive,  there  will  be  feariu  the  land ;  if  the  Peelu  tree  should 
thrive  there  will  be  health  in  the  land;  if  Khadira  and  Sami 
should  thrive,  there  will  be  famine  in  the  land;  and  if  the 
Arjuna  tree  should  thrive  there  will  be  good  rain- 


1 2.  If  Picbnnaanda  (the  nimb  tree)  and  Naga  should  bear 
blossoms,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  land  ;  if  Eapittha 
shoe  Id  bear  bios  oms,  there  will  bo  storm  ;  if  Nichula  (Hijjal) 
should  bear  blossoms  there  will  be  drought  and  if  Kataja 
should  bear  blossoms  there  will  bo  disease  in  the  land. 

l-t  If  Darvu  (bent,  grass;  or  the  Kusa  grass  should  blos¬ 
som,  sugar-cane  will  thrive  ;  if  Kovidara  should  blossom  there 
will  ho  ft/av  from  destructive  tires;  and  if  Syamalata  should 
blossom,  prostitutes  will  prosper.  . 

l  b  There  will  ho  good  rain  in  those  countries  where 
lives,  shrubs  and  creepers  'grow  luxuriantly  with  glossy 
leaves  tminjn  ed  by  worms,  but  if  the  loaves  should  be  other¬ 
wise  there  will  be  little  rain. 


]  BUI  HAT  PAMHm  H 

OSSARY  OP  INDIAN  BOTANICAL  TERMS. 


Arjunu,  Tho  tree  iertninalia  Arjuna, 

Arka,  The  plant  Calotropis  Giganfcea,  «r®ac$* 

As  ana,  IHorocarpus  Bilobus, 

Asoka,  Jonesia  As  oka,  Ifc  is  a  tree  of  moderate  slzo 
belonging  to  the  legurniuous  class  with  magnificent  rod 
flowers,  *yQ#n<£u>jub. 

Aswaknrna,  Yatica'Robusta,  ^virmiru). 

AswattJiM,  The  holy  fig  tree  ;  ficus  religiosa,  4ijr#u>i>'ib. 
Atasi,  Common  flax,  etuFt r. 

Atimuktaka,  Mountain  ebony, 

Badari,  Jajube  tree, 

Bandhnjeeva,  Pentapetes  I’hrenicea,  Qa/uu*3w  or 
eopsQ&up-* 

Bballata,  Marking  nut  plant,  Cashewnut  plant,  Q*m 

Q$fTL- €&>—• 

Champaka,  Miohelia  Champaka, 

Chiribilva,  A  tree,  Dalbergia  Arborea,<-/©?eoa£0/ru>. 

Durva,  Bent  grass,  panic  grass  Panicum  Dacfeylon, 

Hastikarna,  Castor  oil  tree,  or  Qa/rilon^. 

Inguda,  Name  of  a  medicinal  tree— Tenninalia  Catappa, 

toirpv, 

Jambu,  Tho  rose  apple  tree,  Eugenia  Jambolana,  Grrmieo. 
Kahuna,  White  rice  growing  in  deep  waters  ;  it  is  sown 
in  May  and  Juno  aud  ripens  in  December  or  January, 

Qqjgb  d£n&&ihufrt 

Kangu,  A  kind  of  panic  seed  ;  Panicum  Italieum. 
Kapittlia,  Peronia  Elphanturn,  etonr/non'D. 

Karp&sa,  Cotton,  uQQpfg. 

Khadira,  The  tree  Acacia  Catechu,  having  hard  wood, 


W  Xodmvn,  A  species  of  grain  eaten  by  tho  poor,  Paspalum 


>crob i c u  latum,  <*^0. 


BRIHAT  SV^HITA. 


[OH. 


Kovidara,  A  tree  Baubinia  Voriegata,  ic%sotup$  or  Q&nasrg 


Ksbeerikti,  Tho  fig  tree, 

K.uluiha,  A  kind  of  pulse,  dociehos  eoifloros, 

Kumknma,  The  plant  and  the  polleu  of  the  flow  or- Cro¬ 
cus  Sativus, 

Kunda,  Cassia, 

Kuravaka,  Crimson  species  of  amaranth,  *t&. 

Kuan,  J’oa  Cynosuroides, 

Kusumbha,  Safflower,  Cartharnus  Tiuctorius, 

Kutaja,  variety  of  Jasmine,  0i-.n><k<n5?«na4 
Madhuka,  Bassia  L&tifolia,  ®)&!u&>u> 

M'idga,  A  sort  of  kidney-bean  Phaceolus  Radiatus  or 
Phaceolus  Mungo, 

Naga,  The  small  tree  with  fragrant  blossoms,  MosuaRox- 
burgha,  or  Q^/str^ev. 

Nandiloavarta,  A  species  of  plant,  Nerium  coronarium, 

Niehula,  The  tree  Barrington ia  Acutangula  commonly 
called  hijjal,  titr&XL- ujl/. 

Nyagrodha,  The  Indian  fig  tree,  u>/ru> . 

Pal&sa,  Butea  Frondosa, 

Panduka,  A  species  of  rice,  Qu&TZ**Q*eu% 

Pari  j  at  ft,  A  shrub  Nictftnthos  Triads,  uqj&t  ioeoeS(«c«* 
Pataia,  The  trumpet  flower  tree,  un 
Pe  d  u,  A  tree  DU  Ionia  Speciosa, 

Pichumanda,  Tho  nitnb  tree, 

Punriftga,  Rotfcleria  Tinctoria  from  tho  blossoms  of  which 
a  yellowish  dyo  is  prepared. 

trnhi,  The  Sal  tree  probably  the  Diospyros  Ebcnasfcer 
furnishing  timber,  or  lojrfruffib. 

Sami,  Acacia  Stuns  possessing  a  tough  hard  wood  sup¬ 
posed  to  contain  firo,  eL^kv^Lojih. 


BRIHAT  SAMnm. 


^^r^Satia,  hemp;  Cannabis  Sativa,  *t-8r>  or  ei-ibLj. 

Saptaparna,  The  tree  Alatonia  or  Echites  Scholavis, 
%r  $  3a>  u  u  ir  e>\)  to  u -  ih . 

Sarshapa,  Mustard  eced,  a® (5. 

Sbashtika,  A  kind  of  rice  of  quick  growth  ripeniog  in 
about  CO  days, 

Sindhuvara,  The  tree  Vitex  Negundo, 

Sireesha,  Acacia  Sirisa,  eunm*. 

Sougandliika,  The  blue  lotus, 

Sukara,  A  species  of  rice,  &jput-i  Q/r«v. 


SuvarxiiipushpH,  the  globe  amaranth;  e f&i&penfS' 
Syamalata,  A  medicinal  plant,  Periploca  Indica,  country 
Sarsn pari  11a,  tew gpffl&Qs/r if. 

Til  aka,  A  species  of  tree  with  beautiful  flowers, 


UXOLO. 

Tinduka,  The  tree  Diospyros,  Embryopteres,  QsA&i 
AinujxjTU)  or  ^jdcrou. 

Vetasa,  The  Ratan  j  cal  am  as  Rotang, 

Yava,  Barley, 


OAPSTBB  XXX. 

On  Twilight  Houur. 

1.  That  period  which  precedes  the  moment  when  the 
Sun  has  just  half  risen  and  that  which  succeeds  the  moment 
when  tho  Sun  has  just  half  set,  during  which  the  stars  me  in¬ 
visible  is  known  as  Sandhyakala  or  twilight  period.  I*  rotn  the 
peculiar  indications  of  this  period  effects  may  bo  predicted  as 
follows. 

2-  These  indications  are  connected  with*  animals,  birds, 
tho  wind,  the  halo,  the  parhelion  or  mock  sun,  the  Parigha,* 
the  Abhravriksha,  t  the  rainbow,  the  Gandharvanagura,  the 
&»lsr  rays,  the  Danda  J  and  dust  clouds,  their  glow  and  color. 

*  'IhiB  nn  appearance  in  the  aky  ol  tho  shape  of  *n»  iron  bar. 
f  An  appearance  resembling  a  tree  in  sbapt>&sscnioU  by  the  ciOKtlS* 

%  An  appearance  in  tho  sky  resembling  a  club. 


BKIHAT  SAmriTA. 


[CH. 


Id  conw*7 


If  during  tho  period  of  twilight  animals  should  conw= 
Ime  to  howl  fearfully,  the  village  will  perish ;  if  these  auiipala 
remaining  to  the  South  of  an  army  should  so  howl  with  their 
(  ices  turned  to  the  Sun,  such  army  will  moot  with  rain. 


4.  If  either  animals  should  remain  quiet  or  the  winds 
should  blow  gently  on  tho  north  side  of  an  army  there  will  he 
wars  in  tho  land  ;  if  this  should  take  place*  on  tlio  south  side  of 
an  army  such  army  will  bo  reinforced  ;  if  it  should  take  place 
on  both  sides  there  will  be  rain. 


5.  If  at  day  break  birds  and  animals  should  howl  with 
their  faces  turned  to  the  Sun,  tho  country  will  perish  ;  if  they 
should  bo  howl  on  the  South  side  of  a  town  such  town  will  fall 
into  tho  hands  of  enemies. 


G.  TP  immediately  before  sun  rise  or  after  sun-set  violent 
winds  should  blow  breaking  the  tops  of  towers,  trees  and 
houses,  carrying  sand  and  pebbles  along  their  course,  howling 
fearfully  and  bringing  down  bipds  in  flight  there  will  be 
misery  in  the  land. 


7  If  during  the  twilight  hours  either  gentle  winds  or 
no  winds  should  blow,  or  if  birds  and  animals  should  either 
sound  gently  or  remain  quiet  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the 
land. 


8.  If  during  the  twilight  hours  such  appearances  as  tho 
fhuulft,  lightning,  clouds  fish  like  in  uhape, parhelion,  halos,  tho 
rainbow  and  the  appearance  known  as  Irawata  (an  imperfect 
rainbow)  and  solar  rays  should  appear  bright  and  glossy  there 
will  bo  immediate  rain. 

0-  If  toe  rays  cf  tho  rising  or  setting  sun  should  be  bro¬ 
ker.,  <  unequal  lengths,  destroyed  partly,  alterd  in  appearance, 
not- straight,  turning  to  the  left,  thin,  small,  short,  blunt  or 
inutile tu til  and  dim  there  will  bo  drought  and  wars  iu  tho 
land 


BRJHAT  EAMIim. 


14. 


If,  when  th  •  sky  is  clear,  the  rays  should  shoot 
into  tho  skv  and  should  "be  clear,  straight,  long  and  turiiiug 
to  the  right,  there  will  he  happiness  in  the  land. 

11.  [£  the  rays  of  the  rising,  setting  or  to  id-day  sun 


should  be  white,  glossy,  unbroken  and  straight,  tho  rays  aro 
known  as  Ainogha  (excellent)  rays. 

12.  If  the  color  of  the  rays  of  the  rising  or  setting 
sun  should  be  a  mixture  of  white,  black  and  yellow,  or  red- 
white  or  black-white,  or  variegated  or  red  or  green,  or  of 
the  color  of  gold,  and  if  tho  rays  should  extend  throughout 
the  sky,  there  will  be  rain  and  there  will  also  be  slight  fear 
after  seven  clays. 


13,  If  the  rays  of  the  rising  or  setting  sun  should  be 
of  the  color  of  copper,  the  ootmnatider-in-chief  dies;  it  they 
should  bo  yellow  and  red,  he  will  suffer  miseries;  if  green, 
animals  and  crops  will  porisb,  and  if  of  the  color  of  smolco 
cows  will  suffer. 


14.  If  red,  mankind  will  suffer  from  wars  and 
destructive  fires ;  if  white-red,  there  will  be  rain  attended 
with  winds  ;  if  of  the  color  of  ash,  there  w  ill  bo  no  rain;  if 
the  rays  bo  variegated  in  color  or  if  the  color  should  be 
a  mixture  of  black  and  other  colors,  there  will  be  slight  rain. 

15,  If  the  dust  raised  by  the  wind  at  sunrise  or  sun¬ 
set  should  be  very  red  or  very  black,  and  if  such  dust 
should  appear  to  move  in  the  direction  of  the  sun,  man¬ 
kind  will  suffer  from  various  diseases  ;  if  the  dust  should 
be  white,  there  will  bo  happinees  in  tho  land.# 

Ifi.  Dunda  is  an  appearance  in  the  sky  of  tho  shape 
of  a  rod  caused  by  the  wind  bringing  together  clouds  and 
solar  rays ;  if  this  should  appear  in  the  south-east,  south- 


*  Parftsarjv  si iy$  that  if  tho  rising  or  setting  kiih  should  be  cover©*!  by 
dust  resembling  tho  whit©  powder  of  concb,  princes  will  triumph  in  mv  aod 
mankind  will  be  happy. 


HRTtTAT  BAMHITA* 


I«(3t 

n  i  a  a  1» 


norih-wofit  or  north-east,  rulers  will  suffer  miseries^ 
it  J'hould  appear  iu  the  east.,  south,  west  or  north,  the 
Brahmins  will  suffer* 


17.  Tf  it  should  appear  at  sunrise  or  sunset  or  mid- 
dry  ,m  one  of  the  corners),  there  will  be  wars  in  the  land  ; 
if  it  should  be  white,  red,  yellow,  or  black,  the  Brahmins, 
the  Kshatriyas,  the  Vysias  or  tbo  S udras  will  suffer  respoo- 
lively  a  countries  to  which  the  Dunda  points  will  also  suff  t. 

Id.  If  the  appearance  known  as  Abhratevu  (cloud 
tree)  should  be  seen  with  its  ends  of  the  color  of  cor.gu- 
lat<  v.l  milk,  the  body  being  black,  and  if  it  should  conceal 
from  view  the  midday-sun,  there  will  be  abundant  raiu  } 
also  if  the  cl  >uds  should  appear  of  beautiful  yellow  color 
and  thick  at  the  bottom,  the  rainfall  will  bo  abundant. 


10.  If  the  appearance  of  Abhravrikba  should  for 
some  time  move  regularly  and  then  disappear,  the  king 
that  marches  out  for  fight  will  perish;  if  it  should  appear 
like  a  young*  tree,  princes  and  ministers  will  perish. 

20.  If  the  twilight  sky  should  be  of  the  color  of  the 
blue  lotus,  of  tho  cat V eye  gem,  or  of  tho  nut  of  the  lotus, 
am!  if  the  suu  should  have  either  begun  to  rise  or  should 
not  lmvo  set,  there  will  bo  immediate  rain. 

21.  If  during  the  rainy  season  the  twilight  hours 
should  bo  marked  by  the  appearance  of  clouds  shaped 
mah'ficalty,*  if  the  clouds  should  assume  shapes  known  ns. 
Gattdharvanagara  (Air  Castles),  aud  if  the  sky  should  be 
filled  with  snow,  dust  and  smoke,  there  will  l>o  drought; 
if  the  anm  things  should  occur  in  any  other  season,  there 
will  be  wars  iu  the. land 

22.  If  in  fch<  Sis’. ra  (dewy)  and  other  seasons  of  the 
year,  tho  twilight  sky  .  hould  bo  naturally  red,  yellow 


*  Lilt  a  cro'?,  a  \  ittfrt},  \n  te*,  and  tho  like. 


BBXJ3TAT  SASTHITA. 


>r  variegated  in  color,  or  of  the  color  of  totua  or 
there  will  bo  prosperity  in  the  land  during  such  sea¬ 
sons;  but  if  the  color  be  not  n  natur/d  one,  that  is,  brought 
on  by  dust  storms  arid  the  like,  mankind  will  suffer  mi  fieri  6* 
23.  If  a  cloud  shaped  like  a  man  with  a  weapon  in 
liis  hand  should  appear  cut,  and  in  this  state  move  in  the 
direction  of  the  sun,  there  will  be  tear  from  enemies  ;  if 
the  suu  should  appear  to  enter  clouds  of  the  shape  of  a 
white  town,  tho  ruler  will  get  e  new  town  and  add  it  to  his 
possessions. 

2k  If  white  thick  clouds  should  come  forth  from 
tho  south  and  conceal  the  sun,  thero  will  bo  rain  ;  if 
clouds  bush-like  in  sliapo  and  rising  in  quarters  other  than 
that  in  tho  direction  of  the  sun  and  conceal  the  suu,  thero 
will  also  be  rain* 


,§L 


25,  If  at  sunrise  the  appearance  known  as  Parigha 
should  appear  white,  tho  rcigoxing  prince  will  6  utter  ;  if 
of  blood  color,  his  army  will  revolt;  and  if  of  the  color 
of  gold,  the  army  will  gain  in  strength* 

26.  If  the  appearauce  known  as  Parhelion  (mock- 
sun,  should  be  seen  on  both  sides  of  the  sun  and  be 
large,  there  will  be  inach  rain  ;  and  if  it  should  appear  all 
round  the  sun,  not  a  drop  of  rain  will  fall. 


27*  If  at  sunrise  or  sunset  the  clouds  should 
appear  of  the  shape  of  a  flag  or  umbrella,  a  mountain,  an 
elephant  or  a  horse,  the  chief  ruler  will  triumph  in  war  ;  if 
they  should  be  of  blood  color,  thero  will  bo  wars  in  the  land. 

28.  If  at  sunrise  or  sunset  clouds  should  resemble 
columns  of  smoko  rf  burnt  straw  and  be  of  agreeable 
appearance,  the  army  will  gain  in  strength. 

29.  If  at  sunrise  or  sunset  clouds  should  appear 
to  Lang  above  tho  horizon  nod  of  i ho  sK**pe  of  trees  an-. 

red  and  of  disagreeable  appearance.  there  will  be  prosperity 


rl 


0KIHAT  SAHIHTA 


r  ch 


juj/'f  ho  land  ;  if  the  clouds  should  assume  the  shape 
towns,  mankind  will  bo  happy* 

30*  If  birds,  the  she-jackal  and  other  animals  should 
howl  turning  to  the  suu,  if  the  twilight  hky  should  be 
marked  by  dust  and  by  the  appearances,  Danda  and  Parigha, 
and  the  sun  should  appear  lor  several  days  of  altered 
appearance,  the  chief  ruler  will  die  and  there  w  ill  be  famine 
in  the  land. 


31.  Generally  effects  assigned Ito  indications  con¬ 
cocted  with  the  morning  twilight  hours  will  come  to  pass 
at  once,  and  those  of  the  evening  twilight  hours,  either 
iu  the  night  or  within  3  or  7  days  but  effects  assigned 
to  luil os,  to  dust  storms  and  to  Parigha,  will  either  come 
to  pass  at  once  or  take  3  or  7  days  ,*  those  assigned  to 
the  solar  rays,  to  the  rainbow',  lightning,  to  parhelion, 
to  clouds  and,  to  winds,  will  take  effect  that  same  day  ; 
those  assigned  to  birds  will  take  8  clays,  and^  those  assigned 
to  animals,  7  days* 


32.  The  twilight  sky  is  visible  for  a  Yojana  (5  miles)  ; 
lightning  for  6  Yojanas ;  the  roaring  of  the  clouds  will  be 
hoard  at  a  distance  of  5  Yojanas  ;  and  thero  is  no  limit  to 
too  extent  to  which  meteors  might  fall.* 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


On  DiaiUHA.f 

1-  If  the  appoarance  of  Digdaba  should  be  of  yellow 
color,  rulers  will  suffer  ;  if  it  should  be  of  the  color  of  fire, 
the  country  will  suffer ;  if  red  and  the  wind  should  blow 
from  right  to  left,  crops  will  suffer. 


#  Accojtf ingly,  Dotal*  my*  that  effect*  *88ign«d  to  tneteoiio  falls  are 
aot  confined  to  particular  localities,  but  are  felt  throughout  the  land, 

t  Fjwtercaturfti  redo***  of  ib*  horisaa  as  if  cn  fire. 


3.  If  the  appearance  should  bo  seen  about  the  eastern 
horizon,  rulers  and  Kshabriyas  will  suffer  ;  if  it  should  bo 
Been  about  the  aouth-easterr  horizon,  paimors,  sculptors 
and  ehildreix  will  suffer;  if  in  the  south,  wicked  men,  the 
Vvsias,  and  messengers  will  suffer;  if  in  the  south-west,  re¬ 
married  virgin  widows  will  suffor. 

4  If  the  appearance  should  be  seen  about  the  west¬ 
ern  horizon,  SuJras  and  farmers  will  suffer ;  if  in  the  north¬ 
western  horizon,  thieves  and  horses  will  suffer;  if  iu  the 
north,  the  Brahmins  will  suffer;  and  if  iri  the  north-east, 
heretics  and  merchants  will  suffer. 


5.  If  when  the  sky  is  clear,  the  stars  bright,  and  the 
wind  blowing  from  loft  to  right,  the  appearance  <>f  Dig  dab  a 
should  be  of  the  color  of  gold,  rulers  as  well  as  the  country 
will  prosper. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

On  Eartiiqcakes. 

1.  Some  say  that  earthquake  is  caused  by  huge  water 
monsters  and  some  that  it  is  caused  by  the  elephants  s  ip- 
porting  the  Earth,  resting  for  a  time  from  their  labor. 

2-  According  to  some  earthquake  is  caused  by  the 
violent  collision  of  winds  and  their  striking  the  Earth  in 
consequence,  and  according  to  others  the  cause  is  some  invi¬ 
sible  and  unknown  agency. 

8.  Once  upon  a  time,  in  the  days  gone  by,  the  Earth, 
being  shaken  by  the  rising  and  falling  of  nged  moun¬ 
tains,  addressed  Brahma  (the  Creator)  in  tho  court  of 
Indra,  as  follows,  and  with  feelings  of  shatno. 


BHIHAT  SAMHITA. 


Lord,  I  was  named  by  Thoe  <13  the  Unmovir 
Bis  character  ha3  now  suffered,  and  I  am  unable  to  bear 
the  troubles  caused  by  moving  mountains. 

5.  Brahma,  perceiving  her  broken  speech,  trembling 
lips,  bent  bead  and  weeping  eyes,  spoke  as  follows  : 


0.  "  0  In dra,  relieve  the  Earth  M  her  grief;  throw 

thy  weapon — the  Vajrayudha — to  destroy  the  wings  of 
mountains  ”  Indra  saying,  “  It  is  done,”  told  the  Earth  nob 
to  fear  and  spoke  to  her  as  follows : 


7.  Vayu  (the  wind),  Agni  (fire),  India  and  Vanina 
(God  ot  rain),  will  however  henceforth  shako  thee  respec¬ 
tively  in  the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth,  six  hours  of  clay 
and  night,  to  indicate  the  future  good  or  bad  condition  of 
the  world. 


8.  The  asterisms  of  IT.  Phalguni,  Ilasta,  Chittra, 
Svati,  Punarvnsu,  Mrigasira  and  Asvini  are  known  as  the 
circle  or  division  of  Vayu.  The  previous  symptoms  of  an 
earthquake  of  Vayu  occurring  when  the  Moon  is  in  any 
of  these  seven  asterisms,  will  last  for  seven  days. 

9.  Those  symptoms  are :  the  sky  will  be  filled  with 
dust  and  smoke,  violent  winds  will  shake  the  trees,  and  the 
rays  of  the  sun  will  appear  dim. 

10.  In  a  Vayavya  earthquake  the  crops  will  perish; 
the  Earth  will  become  dry;  forests  will  suffer;  medicinal 
plants  will  be  destroyed;  and  tradesmen  will  be  afflicted 
with  dropsy,  asthma,  madness,  fever  and  phlegmatic 
affections. 


11,  Prostitutes  and  men  handling  weapons,  physi¬ 
cians,  women,  poets,  musicians,  merchants,  painters  and 
sculptors  will  suffer  miseries,  us  well  as  the  people  of  Surat, 
of  Kuru,  oi  Magada,  of  Dasarna  and  of  Matsya. 

12.  The  asterisms  of  Pushya,  Krittika,  Visakha,  Bba- 
rani»  Magha*  P.  Bh%dn*  and  P.  Phalguni  are  known  as  the 


gjSffXyS.J  BP.IttAT  SAMFIITA- 

of  Agni.  The  previous  symptoms  of 
bf  Agn i  occurring  when  the  Moon  is  iu  any 
asterisms,  will  last  for  seven  flays. 


an  oarthqua' 
of  these  seven 


Sl 


13.  Those  symptoms  aro  :  the  sky  will  be  filled  with, 
the  light  of  faking  meteors,  and  the  appoHrauce  of  Digdaha 
will  be  seen  about  the  horizon,  and  fire  and  ..arid  will  rage 
over  tho  land* 


14.  In  an  Agneya  earthquake,  the  clouds »  will  be 
destroyed  $  tanks  and  lakes  will  become  dry  ;  rulers  will 
become  hostile  to  ono  another,  arid  mankind  will  fell  tier  from 
ring-worms,  cutaneous  eruptions,  fever,  spreading  itch  and 
jaundice. 


15.  Also  men  of  bright  appearance,  cruel  men  and 
the  people  of  Asmaka,  Anga  Balhika,  Tangana,  Kalinga, 
Bengal  and  of  Dravida,  and  numerous  hill-rwcn  will  sutler 
miseries- 


16.  The  asfcerisms  of  Abfaijifc,  Sravana,  Dhanishta, 
Rohini,  Jyo.dita,  U.  Ashadha  and  Anuradha  are  krown  ns 
the  circlo  of  Indra.  The  previous  symptoms  of  an  earth¬ 
quake  of  Indra  occurring  when  the  Moon  is  iu  any  of  these 
seven  (t&ierisrns,  are  as  follows  : 


17.  Clouds  like  so  many  moving  mountain  a,  roaring 
aloud,  attended  by  lightning  and  black  as  tho  horn  of  a 
bufihlo,  as  the  bee  and  the  black  cobra,  will  yield  abun¬ 
dance  of  rain. 


18.  In  an  Aindrn  earthquake,  the  Vedas,  men  of 
high  caste  and  of  high  families,  rulers  and  commanders  of 
armies,  will  perish.  Dysentery,  inflammation  or  swelling  of 
the  neck,  diseases  of  the  face,  and  tho  vomiting  disease 
will  afflict  mankind. 


19.  Benares,  Yugandhara,  Kirata,  Kleera,  Abhisara, 
Hala,  Matlra,  Avbud.it  and  Malawa  will  sutler,  and  there  will 
be  ruin  to  suit  tho  wants  of  tho  people. 


BRIHA'F  samhita. 


c:it.  3  ■i 


20.  The  aster  isms  of  Re  vat  i,  P.  Ashadha,  Ardra,  As^- 
efshn,  Mnla,  U.  Ash  ad  lia  and  Satabhishak  are  known  as 
the  circle  of  Varuna.  The  previous  symptoms  of  an  earth¬ 
quake  of  Varuna  occurring  when  the  Moou  is  in  any  of 
these  seven  nsterisms  are  as  follows  : 

21.  Clouds  of  tho  color  of  the  blue  lotus,  of  the  bee 
and  of  collyrium,  sounding  agreeably,  in  masses  and  attend, 
ed  by  lightning,  will  yield  sharp  rain. 

22.  In  a  Varuna  earthquake  persona  working  at  the 
sea  or  in  rivers  will  perish  ;  there  will  be  excessive  rain 
and  rulers  will  cease  to  be  hostile.  Tho  people  of  Gonar- 
dha.  Chedi,  Kukura,  Kirata  and  Vidcha  will  suffer  miseries. 


2d.  The  effects  assigned  to  earthquakes  will  occur 
within  six  months  ;  those  assigned  to  the  other  Utpatas  will 
occur  within  two  months  :  these  occurrences  are  classified 
by  some  under  the  heads  of  tho  four  circles  above  referred  to. 

2*.  Meteoric  falls,*  cloud  castles,  dust-storms,  thunder¬ 
bolts,  earthquakes,  fiery  appearances  about  the  horizon, 
violent  winds,  .solar  und  lunar  eclipses,  changes  in  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  stars  ; 

25.  Rainfall  from  a  cloudless  sky,  the  simultaneous 
occurrence  of  wind  and  rain,  tho  appearance  of  smoke  and 
sparks  where  there  is  no  fire,  the  entry  of  wild  animals  irk  to 
villages,  the  appearance  of  rainbow  iu  the  sky  at  night; 

26  Any  unusual  appearance  of  tho  sky  nt  sunrise  or 
sunset,  broken  or  imperfect  halos,  rivers  running  in  oppo¬ 
site  directions,  there  being  heard  the  music  of  the  drum 
in  the  sky,  and  the  liko  unusual  occurrences  should  be 
classified  under  the  heads  of  the  four  circles  of  Vayu,  Agni, 
Varuna  and  Indra.f 


*  Siwuas  21  to  26  are  taken  form  Vuraha  Mihira’s  Samaaa 
Samhita. 

+  Gar^a  says  ;  persor  i  in  whose  NakBbatras  earthquakes  and  the 
like  Utpatas  occur  will  sulTer  miseries;  they  shall  therefore  perform  ex¬ 
piatory  ceremonies  in  honor  of  the  particular  Dera  under  whoso  influence 
the  occurrences  take  place. 


BKlfl'AT  8AMHITA. 

27.  As  regards  the  effects  of  earthquakes  classify 
with  respect  to  time  and  Nukshatra,  whenever  there  is  an 
inconsistency,  the  A  indra  character  with  respect  to  time  will 
take  precedence  over  the  Vavavya  character  with  respect 
to  Nakshatra  ;  and  the  Vayavya  character  with  respect  to 
time  over  the  Aindra  character  with  respect  to  Nakshatia; 
and  so  in  the  case  of  the  Vanina  and  Agneya  character  of 
each  earth  quake,  division  with  respect  to  time  takes  prece 
deuce  over  division  with  respect  to  Nakslmtra.f 

28.  If  an  earthquake  should  partake  of  the  character 
of  one  of  Agni  and  Vayu,  the  chief  ruler  will  perish,  and 
mankind  will  suffer  from  hunger,  fear,  death  and  drought. 

21).  If  an  earthquake  should  partake  ol  tho  character 
of  one  of  Yanina  ana  of  India,  there  will  be  prosperity  in 
the  land,  good  rain  and  gladness  of  heart,  cows  will  yiold 
much  milk,  and  rulers  will  cease  to  be  hostile. 


30.  If  an  earthquake  should  partake  of  the  character 
of  one  of  Vayu  and  Varuua,  the  people  of  Oojiou,  cl  Puliuda, 
of  Videha,  of  Cashmere,  of  Jjravida,  of  Vasunta,  and  those 
that  live  on  the  banks  of  tho  Sarayu,  will  suffer  miseries.1* *1 


31.  If  an  earthquake  should  partake  of  the  character 
of  one  of  India  and  of  Agni;  the  people  of  Ikshwnku, 
Asmavathya,  Pata,  Cham,  Abhira,  China  and  Mirukaccha, 
and  prosperous  rulers  will  suffer  miseries. 

$2.  In  the  case  of  those  Ufcpataa  for  t»he  effects  of 
which  no  period  has  been  given,  the  rule  is  as  follows  :  if 
the  occurrences  belong  to  the  circle  of  Yayu,  the  period  is 
four  fortnights;  if  to  tho  circle  of  Agni,  three  fortnights  ; 
if  of  Indra,  seven  days  ;  and  if  of  Varan  a,  the  effects  will  como 
to  pass  immediately. 


f  Garjra  sdjb  that  if  an  e&rthqrake  is  competed  wi  .b  two  Nakah&- 
trQfi,  division  with  respect  to  time  of  day  takes  precedence, 

*  Stanzas  30  and  31  are  taken  from  Parana. 


20 


BRIHAT  SAMB'ITA. 


BRIHAT  SANBITA-  [CH.I 

y/J  <  3.  Iq  an  earthquake  of  Vayn,  the  shock  will  be  fA._ 

’  td  a  distance  of  two  hundred  Yojanas  (1,000  miles);  in  one 
of  Agni,  110  Yojan&s  ;  in  one  of  Vanina,  180  Yojauaa,  and 
in  one  of  Indra  100  Yojanas. 


84.  If  after  the  occurrence  of  an  earthquake  another 
should  occur  on  the  3rd,  4th,  7th,  loth,  30fch  or  45th  day 
the  chief  ruler  will  perish. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

On  ULKAfc  on  Meteors.  * 

1.  Meteors  are  appoarances  of  those  who,  having  en- 
joyed  in  the  higher  worlds  the  offeets  of  their  Punnyakarma 
(good-deeds),  fall  down  to  the  Earth.  These  meteors  are  of 
f>  sorts  known  technichally  as  1.  Dhishnya,  2.  Ulka,  3.  Asaui 
(thunder-bolt),  4.  Vidyub  (lightning),  and  5.  Tara. f 

2.  Dhishnya  produces  its  effects  within  a  fortnight; 
Ulka  lakes  also  the  same  period  ;  Asani  produces  its  effects 
within  a  month  and  a  half ;  Vidyut  within  G  days  and  Tara 
takes  the  same  poriod. 

3.  Tara  produces  only  a  fourth  of  tho  effects  assigned 
to  metoors  in  general.  Dhishnya  one  half,  and  Vidyut, 
Ulka  and  Asani  produce  their  full  effects. 

4.  Asaui  is  a  meteoric  substance,  circular  in  shape ;  it 
strikes  with  a  loud  report  mon,  elephants,  horses,  deer, 
rocks,  houses,  trees  and  sheep,  and  passes  into  the  Earth. 

5.  Vidyut  is  a  large  bent  ficiy  substance  and  strikes, 
wdh  a  loud  and  fearful  sound,  living  creatures  and  collec¬ 
tion  of  wood. 


This  (orm  has  been  made  to  include  a  number  of  unusual  appear¬ 
ances— Vale  text.  l  i 


URI1IAT  SAMHITA* 


m  Dhishnya  is  a  blazing  fiery  meteoric  appearance 

and  with  a  small  tail,  and  visible  beyond  a  distance  of 
40  cubits,  its  length  is  two  cubits. 

7.  Tara  is  a  meteoric  substance,  a  cubit  in  length,  and 
of  white  or  copper  color,  or  of  the  color  of  the  stem  of  the 
lotus  ;  it  will  appear  to  movo  either  horizontally  or  vert  ically 
downwards  or  upwards  as  if  dragged  by  some  invisible  force- 

8.  Ulka  (meteor)  i*  an  appearance  with  a  large  head, 
a,  very  small  tail  and  of  the  length  of  a  matins  body  )  as  it 
falls  it  increases  in  length.  This  appearance  itf  of  several 
kinds. 


ft.  It.  a«nmes  the  shapo  of  a  dead  body,  £  weapon,  an 
a. as,  a  camel,  a  crocodile,  a  monkey,  a  tusked  animal,  a 
plough,  a  deer, a  lizard,  u  snake  or  smoke,  and  it  sometimes 
appears  double  headed.  It  causes  misery  in  tho  land. 

10.  If  it  should  be  of  the  shape  of  a  flagstaff,  of  fish, 
an  elephant,  a  bill,  a  lotus,  the  moon,  11  horse,  melting  silver, 
a  swau,  the  Bilva  tree,  the  vajrayudha  U  weapon),  or  conch 
or  a  triangle,  there  will  be  prosperity  in  the  laud. 


11.  Numberless  meteors  fail  from  the  sky  ;  these  im¬ 
port  misery  to  the  reigning  sovereign.  Meteors  that 
simply  whirl  round  and  round  ftbport  misery  to  tho  world 
at  largo. 


12.  Those  moteors  which,  when  they  fall,  just  appear 
to  touch  the  solar  or  lunar  disc,  or  to  issue  from  it  and 
which  are  at  the  same  time  accompained  by  earthquakes 
import  a  foreign  rule,  famine,  dronght  and  fears  of  various 


sorts. 


13.  If  tho  meteors  should  appear  to  move  from  tho 
right  to  the  left  of  the  sun  and  moon,  houseless  people  will 
Buffer  iniseries*  If  a  meteor  which  appears  to  have  issued 
from  tho  sun  should  fall  before  one  who  marches  out  for 
fight,  it  imports  good  luck. 


BUI  HAT  &A3THITA* 


[CH. 


f4.  If  the  meteors  should  be  white,  red,  yellow  or  hlac* 
ttf  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  the  Vysias  and  the  Sndras  will 
respectively  suffer  ;  tho  same  effects  will  occur  if  the  meteor 
falls  with  its  head,  breast,  side  or  tail  foremost. 

15.  ft'  the  meteor  should  be  of  fearful  appearance  and 
if  it  should  fall  in  the  north,  east,  south  or  west,  tho 
Brahmins,  the  Kshatriyas,  tho  Vysias  and  Sudras  will  suffer 
respectively. 


If  the  meteor  should  appear  straight,  glossy  and  broken, 
and  if  in  its  full  it  be  visible  to  within  a  short  distance 
from  the  Earth,  the  Brahmins  and  the  others  will  prosper 
(according  as  the  direction  of  the  fall  of  the  meteor  is  the 
north,  east,  sovith  or  West.) 


1G.  If  the  color  of  the  meteor  should  be  white,  black, 
red,  bine,  of  blood  color,  of  the  color  of  tire,  or  black,  or  of 
the  color  of  ash,  and  if  its  appearance  should  be  fearful,  and 
if  it  should  appear  either  immediately  before  sunrise  or 
after  sunset  or  during  the  day,  or,  if  it  should  appear  crook¬ 
ed  or  out  into  halves,  there  will  be  fear  of  foreign  invasion. 

17.  If  the  meteor  should  be  seen  to  fall  crossing  the 
discs  of  stars  and  planets,  the  persons  and  objects  represent¬ 
ed  by  hucIi  stars  and  planets  will  suffer.  If  it  should  be 
seen  to  fall  crossing  the  discs  of  the  sun  or  moon  at  rising 
or  setting,  houseless  people  will  suffer. 

18.  If  a  meteor  should  be  aeon  to  fall  crossing  the 
discs  of  P.  Phftlguni,  Punarvasu,  Pluinishta  and  Mala,  young 
women  will  suffer.  If  it  should  be  seen  to  fall  crossing  tbe 
discs  of  Pushya,  Swati  and  Sravana,  the  Brahmins  and  the 
Kshatriyas  will  suffer. 

1th  If  it  should  be  seen  to  fall  crossing  the  discs  of 
the  pole  star  and  benefio  planets  and  stars,  tbe  chief  rulers 
will  suffer  ;  if  crossing  the  discs  of  malefic  plauetaand  stars, 
thieves  will  suffer,  and  if  crossing  tho  discs  of  ordinary 
stars,  music  and  fine  arts  will  suffer. 


BRiriAT  BAMHITA. 


If  the  meteor  should  bo  seen  to  fall  on  the  ima; 

Tie  Devas  the  rulers  and  their  countries  will  suffer;  if  ib 
should  fall  on  the  Sakra  tree  (Peutaptem  Arjuna)  kings 
will  sutler,  and  if  on  houses,  til©  owners  thereof  will  suiter. 


21.  If  it  should  be  seen  to  faff  crossing  the  discs  of 
the  direction  planets*,  the  countries  situate*!  in  the  respec¬ 
tive  directions  will  suffer ;  if  on  threshing  floor,  farmers 
will  suffer  y  and  if  on  the  sacred  trees  planted  in  public  places 
virtuous  men  will  suffer. 


22-  If  it  should  fall  at  the  entrance  to  towns,  the 
towns  will  suffer ;  if  on  ornamental  structures  over  buildings, 
the  people  will,  suffer  ;  it  in  the  middle  of  Brahmin  habita¬ 
tions,  the  Brahmins  will  suffer  ;  and  if  in  cuttle-fold,  the 
owner  of  the  herd  will  suffer. 


23.  If,  while  it  falls,  its  noise  should  bo  like  the  roar 
of  the  lion,  like  the  sound  caused  by  striking  against  one’** 
breast  or  like  a  combination  of  vocal  and  instrumental  music 
the  rulers  with  their  countries  will  suffer. 


24.  If  the  meteoric  appearance  should  bo  seen  to 
hover  in  the  sky  for  a  long  time,  of  the  shape  of  a  stick,  oi^ 
if  it  should  bo  seen  of  the  shape  of  Indra’s  banner  suspend¬ 
ed  in  the  sky  as  if  by  threads,  rnllrs  will  suffer. 

25.  If  while  it  falls  it  should  retrograde  in  its  motion, 
merchnnts  will  suffer  ;  if  it  should  move  horizontally,  queens 
will  suffer;  if  vertically  downwards,  rulers  will  suffer  ;  aud 
if  vertically  upwards,  the  Brahmins  will  suffer. 

26.  If  the  meteor  should  bo  of  the  color  and  shnp* 
of  the  peacock’s  train,  there  will  be  misery  in  the  land  ;  if 
it  should  move  like  a  serpent,  women  will  suffer. 

27.  If  it  should  appear  circular  in  shape,  towns  will 
suffer  ;  if  of  the  shape  of  an  umbrella,  priests  will  suffer; 


•  TheHr-  are  .*  the  Sue — K, ;  Venus— -8.  E. ;  Mars — 8.  ^  Rahu — S.  W.  ; 

Saturn — W.  ;  Moon— N.  W. ;  Mercury— N.  j  and  Jupiter--N.  E. 


brihat  pamhita. 


:  ,, 


if  of  the  shape  of  a  clinnp  of  bamboos,  the  kingdom  wii 

e  imperilled. 

28.  If  ife  should  bo  of  the  shape  of  a  snake  or  a 
pig,  or  appear  as  if  covered  with  sparks  of  fire,  or  cut  or  fall 
with  noise,  there  will  bo  misery  in  the  laud. 

~9.  If  ife  should  appear  of  the  shape  of  the  rainbow, 
the  kingdon  will  suffer;  if  it  should  disappear  in  the  sky, 
clouds  will  be  destroyed  ;  if  it  should  move  against  the 
course  of  tho  wind  or  obliquely  or  retrograde  in  its  motion, 


there  will  bo  misery  in  the  land. 

?0.  If  it  should  fall  on  a  town  or  an  army,  the  ruler 
will  suffer  from  such  town  or  army  ;  if  it  should  appear  to 
come  blazingfrom  acertain  quarter,  tho  prince  that  marches 
for  fight  in  that  direction  will  succeed  in  battle. 


CHAPTEli  XXXIV. 

On  Halos. 

1-  When  the  sky  is  filled  with  thin  light  clouds,  the 
solar  or  lunar  rays,  gathered  together  by  the  action  of  the 
wind,  and  made  into  circles  of  different  sizes  aud  colors, 
form  what  arc  known  as  Halos. 

2.  If  the  color  of  ftiese  halos  should  be  rod,  their 
lord  is  Tndra;  if  blue,  Yams  ;  if  gray,  Vanina  >  if  of  tho 
color  of  the  dove,  Nirrnti  (a  demon  presiding  over  the  S.  W. 
point  of  the  compass)  ;  if  of  the  color  of  the  clouds,  Vayu  j 
if  variegated  in  color,  Eesanya  (a  deity  presiding  over  the 
N.  E.  point  of  tho  compass);  if  green,  Kubera  (God  of 
wealth)  ;  and  if  white,  Agni. 

o.  Kubera  also  causes  the  halo  to  appear  black,  and 
the  other  gods  to  appear  with  the  color  belonging  to  each. 
If  a  halo  should  be  seen  to  appear  and  disappear  at  brief 
intervals  of  time,  it  is  caused  by  Vayu,  and  it  will  not  pro¬ 
duce  effects  of  a  permanent  nature. 


BKIITAT  flAMIflTA. 


If  the  b;\!o  should  appear  of  the  color  of  a  peacock 
or  silver,  or  oil  or  milk,  or  water,  and  of  the  shape  of 
a  complete  circle  and  glossy,  there  will  be  happiness  in  tho 


land. 


5.  If  the  solar  or  lunar  halos  should  continue  from 
the  rising  to  tho  setting  of  the  luminaries,  frequently 
changing  in  color,  or  if  the  halos  should  appear  red  or  dis¬ 
agreeable  or  imperfect  or  oblongular  or  triangular  in  shape, 
or  of  tho  shape  of  a  bow,  there  will  be  misery  in  tho  land. 

6.  If  the  halo  should  appear  of  the  color  of  the  neck 
of  the  peacock,  there  will  be  rain;  if  it  should  appear 
variegated  in  color,  the  chief  ruler  will  be  assassinated  ;  if 
of  the  color  of  smoke,  there  will  be  fear  in  the  land  ;  if  of 
tho  color  of  the  rainbow  or  red  like  the  flower  of  the 
Asoka,  there  will  be  wars  in  tho  land. 

7.  If  in  the  rainy  season,  the  solar  or  lunar  halo  should 
either  appear  of  a  single  color,  or  glossy  if  of  different 
colors,  or  occupied  by  clouds  sword-like  in  shape,  or  if  the 
sun,  while  surrounded  by  a  halo,  should  appear  very  bright 
aud  yellow,  there  will  bo  immediate  rain. 


8.  If  the  solar  or  lunar  halos  should  appear  big  at  tho 
eastern  or  western  horizon  or  at  the  meridian,  and  if  birds 
and  animals  should  be  found  to  howl  with  their  faces 
turned  to  the  San  or  Moon,  and  if  the  color  c£  the  halos 
should  be  dim,  mankind  will  be  tormented  with  various 
fears.  If  the  halo  should  be  crossed  by  meteors  or  light¬ 
ning,  the  chief  ruler  will  meet  his  death  by  a  weapon. 

9.  If,  daily,’  tho  Sun  and  Moon  should  appear  red,  the 
chief  ruler  will  die ;  if  halos  should  bo  frequently  seen 
round  the  Sun  and  Moon  at  rising  or  setting,  or  in  the 
meridian,  ruler9  will  be  killed. 


*  According  to  Gorpa  it  tho  appearance  should  last  for  a  sirgle  day,  the 
chief  ruler  will  die,  and  if  for  7  days,  the  country  will  periah. 


concentric 

with  fear, 

an$  there  will  also  bo  wars  but  not  of  a  fearful  nature  ;  it 
the  halo  should  consist  of  three  concentric  circles,  there  will 
b‘>  wars,;  if  of  four  circles,  the  first  prince  will  suffer 
miseries;  and  if  of  five  circles,  the  capital  city  will  be 
seized  by  the  enemy. 

11.  If  the  halo  should  include  within  it  a  planet  the 
Moon  and  Stars,  there  will  bo  either  vain  within  three  days  or 
wars  within  a  moil  tin  According  to  some  that  prince  will 
suffer  miseries  the  lord  of 'the  Lagna  (rising  sign)  of  whose 
nativity,  the  lord  of  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon,  and 
whose  star  should  happen  to  be  included  within  the  circle 
of  a  lunar  or  solar  halo* 

12.  If  Saturn  should  be  included  within  thennrcle  of 
a  lunar  or  solar  halo,  the  minor  crops  will  perish  ;  there 
will  be  vain  attended  by  storms  and  deaths  among  settled 
farmers. 

13.  If  Mars  should  bo  so  included,  children  and  com¬ 
manders  of  armies  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  £6ar  from 
wars  and  destructive  fires.  If  Jupiter  should  be  so  in¬ 
cluded,  priests,  ministers  and  rulers  will  suffer. 

14.  If  Mercury  should  be  so  included,  ministers  and 
permanent  writers  will  be  happy  and  there  will  be  good 
rain.  If  Venus  should  be  so  included,  princes  that  march 
out  for  fight  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  good  food  in 
the  land. 

15*  If  Ketu  should  be  so  included,  mankind  will 
suffer  miseries  from  hunger,  fire,  death,  and  from  rulers. 
If  Rahu  should  be  so  included,  pvegnancy  will  miscarry 3 
there  will  be  disease  in  the  land,  aud  rulers  will  suffer. 


filUHAT  SAMUITA. 


If  the  halo  should  consist  of  two 
circles,  the  commander-in-chief  will  be  afflicted 


BBIITA7  SAMH ITA 


16.  If  two  planets  should  be.  included  within  a  solar 
or  lunar  halo,  there  will  bo  wars  in  the  land;  if  three 
should  be  so  included,  mankind  will  suffer  from  hunger 
and  drought. 


17.  If  four  planets  should  be  included  within  a  halo, 
rulers,  ministers  and  priests  will  suffer;  if  five  or  sir 
planets  should  be  so  included,  the  world  will  come  to  an  end. 

18.  If  while  the  comets  do  not  appear,  Mars  aud 
other  planets  should  be  separately  eclipsed,  or  if  tho  stars 
should  be  so  eclipsed,  ru:  ts  will  perish.* 

19.  If  the  halo  should  appear  on  the  first  day  of  tho 
dark  or  bright  half  of  a  lunar  month,  there  will  be  deaths 
among  tho  Brahmins;  if  on  the  second  day,  there  will  be 
deaths  among  the  Kshatriyas;  if  on  the  third  day,  there 
will  bo  deaths  among  the  Yysiyas  ;  and  if  on  the  fourth 
day,  there  will  be  deaths  among  the  Sudrns;  if  tho  halo 
should  appear  on  the  fifth  day,  villages  will  suffer  ;  if  on 
tho  sixth  day,  towns  will  suffer;  and  if  on  tho  seventh  day, 
treasuries  and  store-houses  will  suffer. 


20.  If  tho  halo  should  appear  on  the  eighth  day  of 
tho  dark  or  bright  half  of  a  lunar  month,  the  first  prince 
will  suffer;  if  on  tho  ninth,  tenth  or  eleventh  day,  the  king 
will  suffer  ;  if  ori  the  twelfth  day,  the  chief  town  will  bo  be¬ 
sieged  by  the  enemy#  and  if  on  the  thirteenth  day.  there  will 
be  confusion  and  dismay  in  the  army. 

21.  If  the  halo  should  appear  on  tho  fourteenth  day 
of  tho  dark  or  bright  half  of  a  lunar  month,  the  queen  will 
suffer;  and  if  on  the  fifteenth  (new  or  full  moon)  day,  rulers 
will  suffer. 

22.  The  inner  circle  of  the  balo  represents  citizens,  tho 
outer  circle  represents  the  army  marching  out  for  fight,  and 
the  central  circle  represents  the  army  pursued  by  the  enemy. 


*  if  comets  appear  at  tho  time,  the  effect*  assigned  to  them  will  alone 
come  to  pass. 


21 


BMHAt  bamhita. 


-w ■•■VW: ' 


23.  If  any  of  these  circles  should  appear  of  blood- 
color  or  black  or  of  fearful  appearance,  the  persons  it  repre¬ 
sents  will  a  offer  defeat.  If  any  of  these  circles  should  ap¬ 
pear  glossy,  white,  and  bright,  the  persons  it  represents 
will  succeed  in  battle- 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

On  the  Rainbow. 

1.  The  many  colored  rays  of  the  Sun  falling  upon 
the  clouds  and  being  broken  by  the  winds  take  the  shape 
of  the  rainbow  in  the  sky. 

2.  In  the  opinion  of  certain  writers*  the  rainbow  is 
formed  of  the  expired  breath  of  certain  serpents*  of  the 
diviue  order  ;  princes  that  march  out  for  light  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  rainbow  will  suffer  defeat. 

3.  If  two  rainbows,  similar  to  each  other  should  appear 
perfect,  unbroken,  bent  towards  the  Earth,  bright,  glossy, 
thick  and  variegated  in  color,  there  will  be  abundant  rain. 

4.  Rainbows  appearing  in  particular  quarters  of  the 
sky  will  cause  tho  death  of  tho  persons  represented  by  such 
quarters, f  and  if  the  rainbow  should  bo  seen  in  places  other 
than  the  sky,  there  will  be  deaths  in  tbo  land  ;  if  it  should 
appear  white-red,  mankind  will  suffer  from  weapons ;  if 
yellow,  from  lire  ;  and  if  blue,  from  starvation. 

5-  If  the  rainbow  should  be  seen  in  the  middle  of 
water,  there  will  be  drought;  if  on  earth,  crops  will  be  in¬ 
jured  ;  if  on  trees,  there  will  be  disease  in  the  land;  if  on 
aut  bills,  there  will  be  wars,  and  if  seen  at  night,  ministers 
will  perish. 

•  Knsyapa  and  men  of  his  school. 

f  are  given  in  a  subsequent  chapter,  ri$  .*  tho  Chapter  on  Saku* 

oft.  They  are  King*— B. ;  First  prince  -  S.  E. ;  Commander-in-  chief— 8. ; 
Messengers— 8.  W. ;  Head-men — W.  j  Bpieg— N.  >V.  ;  Brahmins— N. ;  the 
principal  of  h  sacrificial  fir#.— N,  E. 


BEIHAT  SAMH1TA. 


lj 


If  tli o  rainbow  should  appear  when  there  is  no  rain, 
ier*  will  bo  rain,  and  if  while  it  rains,  the  rain  will  cease 
If  it  should  appear  in  the  west,  there  w’ll  also  bo  rain. 

7.  If  at  night  the  rainbow  should  be  seen  in  the  east, 
kings  will  suffer;  if  in  the  South,  the  commander-in-chief 
will  die;  if  in  the  West,  masters  will  suffer;  and  if  in  the 
north,  minister*  will  suffer. 


8.  If,  at  night,  the  rainbow  should  appear  white,  red, 
yellow  or  black,  the  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  the  Vysiyas 
and  the  Sudras  will  suffer  respectively.  If  at  night  the 
rainbow  should  appear  in  particular  quarters  of  the  sky,  the 
rulers  in  those  quarters  of  the  Earth  will  perish. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

On  Gandeiakvanagauas  on  Cloud  Castles. 

1.  If  the  appearance  of  Gandharvanagara  should  he 
seen  in  the  north,  priests  will  suffer  ;  if  in  the  east,  rulers 
will  suffer;  if  in  the  south,  coramandt-rs  of  armies  will  suffer, 
and  if  in  the  west,  the  first  prince  will  suffer.  If  the  ap¬ 
pearance  should  bo  white,  the  Brahmins  will  suffer ;  if  red, 
the  Kshatriyas  ;  if  yellow,  the  Yrysias  ;  and  if  black,  the  Su¬ 
dras  will  Buffer¬ 
s',  If  the  appearance  should  be  seen  in  the  north 
citizens  and  rulers  will  suffer;  if  seen  in  the  corners,  the 
mixed  races  will  suffer;  and  if  seen  in  the  direction  opposite 
to  the  sun,  rulers  will  triumph  in  war. 

3.  If  the  appearance  should  be  seen  in  all  directions 
and  for  a  long  time,  princes  and  countries  will  suffer;  if  it 
should  be  of  the  color  of  smoke,  fire,  rainbow,  thieves  and 
and  forest-men  will  suffer* 

4.  If  the  appearance  should  bo  seen  %  little  white, 
there  will  be  sufferiug  from  thunderbolt  and  from  storms ; 


E<RJHAT  fUMHITA. 


ie  direction  of  the  sun,  the  chief  ruler  will  perish  ; 
n  on  the  left  side,  there  will  be  fear  from  enemies,  and  if 


on  the  right  side  there  will  be  success  in  war. 


5.  If  it  should  appear  of  various  hues  and  shapes  or 
of  the  shape  of  a  flag,  banner  or  archway,  such  bloody  wars 
will  rage  over  the  land  that  the  Earth  will  drink  large 
quantities  of  the  blood  of  elephants,  men  and  horses. 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

On  Paiuieuon. 

I  If  the  appearance  of  Pratisurya  or  Parhelion 
should  be  of  the  col  r  assigned  to  the  Sun  for  the  several 
seasons  of  the  year  and  at  the  same  time  glossy,  or  if  it 
should  bo  of  the  color  of  the  catAs-eye  (gem)  or  clear  and 
white,  there  will  bo  prosperity  in  the  land. 

2.  If  the  appearance  should  bo  yellow,  there  wiil*be 
diseases  in  the  land ;  if  red,  resembling  the  color  of  the 
Asoka  flower,  there  will  be  wars  If  these  appearances 
should  together  form  a  figure  o£  the  shape  of  a  garland, 
there  will  bo  suffering  from  thieves  and  the  chief  ruler  will 
perish. 

3.  If  the  appearance  should  bo  seen  to  the  north  of 
the  Sun,  there  will  be  rain  ;  if  to  the  south  of  the  Sun,  there 
will  be  winds;  if  on  both  sides  of  the  Sun  there  will  bo 
fear  IVoth  floods;  if  seen  above  the  Sun  rulers  will  perish  ;  and 
if  below  the  Sun,  there  will  be  deaths  in  the  land. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIIT. 

On  Dust  Storms. 

1.  If  the  dust  storm  should  be  so  blaok  and  dense  as 
to  render  mountains,  towns  and  trees  undistinguialmble,  the 
reigning  prince  will  die. 


tiRIHAT  SAifHITA. 


If  the  dust  storm  should  bo  of  the  color  of  smoke*- 
bore  will  bo  suffering  in  the  countries  in  which  the  storm 
appears  for  the  first  time  or  disappears  finally,  within  seven 
days  from  the  occurrence  of  the  event. 


3*  It  the  dust  storm  should  resemble  white  clouds, 
ministers  and  people  at  large  will  suffer;  there  will  be  wars 
in  tho  land  and  mankind  will  be  afflicted  with  innumerable 
iniseues. 


4.  If  the  dust  storm  should  appear  to  hid©  the  sky 
about  sun-rise  on  one  or  two  consecutive  days,  mankind 
will  suffer  from  great  fears. 

5.  If  tho  storm  should  continue  dense  for  a  night, 
the  chief  ruler  will  perish  ;  but  other  princes  will  prosper. 

6.  If  in  a  particular  country  the  storm  should  be 
found  to  remain  for  two  days  together,  that  country  will  be 
overrun  by  the  army  of  the  enomy. 

7.  If  the  dust  storm  should  be  found  to  continue  for 
three  or  four  days,  there  will  be  scarcity  in  the  land,  and 
juice  will  be  injured  ;  if  it  should  coutiuue  for  five  days, 
contending  armies  will  engage  in  fight, 

8.  If  a  malefic  dust  storm  unaccompanied  by  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  comets  and  tho  like  abnormal  phenomena  should  be 
seen  in  any  Ritu  (season)  except  Sisii  a  (from  the  middle  of 
January  to  that  of  March),  it  will  produce  the  full  effecta 
assigned  to  it. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

On  Thunderbolts. 

1.  When  two  winds  come  in  collision,  that  which, 
being  struck,  falls  on  the  Earth  is  known  as  thunderbolt; 
if  at  the  time  birds  should  begin  to  sound  turning  to  the 
Sun  there  will  be  misery  on  Earth. 


BBIEAT  SAMJIITA. 


If  there  should  occur  a  full  of  thunderbolt  at 
sunrisff,  officials,  king*,  rich  men,  soldiers*  women,  mer¬ 
chants  and  prostitutes  will  perish  ;  if  the  fall  should  occur 
within  three  hours  after  sunrise*  sheep,  the  Sudras  and 


citizens  will  suffer. 


3.  IE  the  fall  should  occur  before  midday,  the  king** 
servants  and  Brahmins  will  suffer;  if  it  should  occur  within 
three  hours  after  midday,  the  Yyaiyas  and  clouds  will 
suffer,  and  if  before  sunset  thieves  will  suffer. 


4.  If  the  fall  of  thunderbolt  should  occur  at  sunset, 
low-caste  men  will  suffer;  if  it  should  occur  in  the  first 
three  hours  after  sunset,  crops  will  suffer;  and  if  before 
midnight,  ghosts  will  Buffer. 


5.  If  the  fall  of  the  thunderbolt  Bhoulcl  occur  withiu 
the  three  hours  after  midnight,  horses  and  elephants  will 
perish  ;  and  if  before  sunrise,  travellers  will  suffer,  and  also 
those  countries  will  suffer  in  the  direction  of  which  the 
roar  of  thunder  appears  to  move. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

On  SastaJataka  or  Vegetable  Horoscopy. 

1.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  laws  or  yogas 
(positions  of  the  planets)  aa  stated  by  Badarayana  (Yyasa) 
(from  which  to  determine  the  growth  of  the  greeshraa  or 
sarat  crops)  wheu  the  Sun  just  enters  the  sign  of  Vriscbika 
(Scorpio)  or  the  sign  Vrishabha  (Taurus). 

2,  If  at  tbo  time  when  the  Sun  enters  the  vsign  Scor¬ 
pio.  bonefio  planets  should  occupy  the  said  sign,  or  the 
fourth,  seventh  or  tenth  houses  from  it,  or  if  these  four 
bouses  should  be  within  sight  of  benefic  planet*,  the  greesh- 
mn  or  summer  crops  will  thrive, 


|fi.]  BKIHAT  SAMFIITA. 

%  If ,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  Jupiter  should 
quarius  and  the  Moou  in  Leo  or  vice  versa,  the  summer 
crops  will  thrive. 

4.  If,  when  the  Snn  is  in  Scorpio,  Venus  or  Mercury 
or  both  should  occupy  either  the  second  house  from  the 
Sun,  viz.,  Sagittarius  or  the  twelfth  house  Libra,  summer 
crops  will  thrive.  If  at  the  same  time  the  sign  of  Sagittari¬ 
us  or  Libra  should  be  within  sight  of  Jupiter,  such  crops 
will  grow  in  great  abundance. 

5.  ]f,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio?  and  between  beoe- 
flc  planets,  Jupiter  and  the  Moon  should  be  in  the  seventh 
house,  Taurus,  summer  crops  will  thrive  exceedingly  well; 
and  if,  when  he  has  just  entered  Scorpio,  Jupiter  should  be 
in  the  second  house,  Sagittarius,  the  extent  of  the  growth 
of  such  crops  will  be  on o  half. 

H.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Scorpio,  Venus,  the  Moon  and 
Mercury  should  respectively  occupy  the  el*v<  nth,  fourth, 
ami  second  houses  (from  Scorpio)  and  Jupiter  the  tenth 
house,  summer  crops  will  grow  in  abundance. 

7.  If,  when  the  Sun  has  just  entered  Scorpio,  Jupiter 
should  be  in  Aquarius,  the  Mo  m  in  Taurus,  Mars  and  Sa¬ 
turn  in  Capricornns,  the  summer  crops  will  thrive  well  and 
there  will  also  be  fear  of  foreign  invi  sion  and  diseases  in 
the  laud. 

8.  If,  when  the  Snn  is  in  Scorpio,  there  should  bo  male- 
fic  plnuents  on  both  sides,  crops  will  be  injured  ;  and  if  a 
malefic  pb> net  should  occupy  the  seventh  house,  Taurus, 
crops  will  suffer  blight. 

9.  If,  when  the  Sun  is  in  scorpio,  malefc  danefs 
should  occupy  the  second  house  Sagittarius  and  if  they  are 
not  withiu  sight  of  bonefic  planets  the  first  crops  will  suffer 
and  the  subsequent  crops  will  thrive* 


BRJHAT  BAM THT A. 


10.  If,  when  the  Run  is  in  scorpio,  two  malefic  plane 
lould  occupy  the  seventh  house,  Taurus,  crops  will  be  in¬ 
jured;  but  if  such  seventh  Jv'use  should  be  within  sight  of 
bonefie  planets  at  the  same  time,  crops  will  grow  bore  and 
there. 


11.  If,  when  the  Run  is  in  Scorpio,  two  malefic  planets 
should  occupy  the  seventh  and  sixth  houses,  crops  will 
thrive  and  the  price  of  commodities  will  fall. 


12.  The  growth  of  the  autumnal  crops  Rhould  bo  de¬ 
termined  from  the  position  of  the  planets  with  reference  to 
sign  Taurus  at  the  time  when  the  Sun  enters  it  just  in  the 
came  way  us  the  summer  crops  as  stated  above. 


13*  If  while  the  Sun  passes  through  the  signs  of 
-Aries,  Taurus  and  Geroinii,  he  should  be  accompanied  by  or 
within  sight  of  benefic  planets,  tho  summer  crops  will  flour¬ 
ish,  and  the  price  of  such  produce  will  either  be  moderate 
or  will  rise. 


34.  Jf  while  the  Surpasses  through  the  signs  of  vRagit- 
tarim.  Cnpricornus  and  Aquarius,  lie  should  either  be  accom¬ 
pany  d  by  or  within  sight  of  bonefie  planets,  the  autumnal 
crops  will  flourish  and  the  price  of  such  prodnee  will  either 
be  m  oderate  ov  will  rise;  if  at  the  time  of  harvest  the  sun 
should  be  either  accompanied  by  or  within  sight  o£  malefic 
planets,  prices  will  either  fluctuate  ov  fall. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

On  Commodities. 

h  I  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  Zodiacal  division 
of  commodities  adopting  the  views  of  the  >ages  of  the  past 
with  a  view  to  enable  men  to  know  before-hand  what 
articles  can  be  had  in  abundance  ana  what  will  become 


rare 


BHJHAT  BAMHITA. 


161 


^  2.  Sign  Mesha  (Aries)  represents  cotton  and  woollen 

fabric,  leathern  oil  j»rs,  beans,  wheat,  raggy,  barloy,  dry 
crops  in  general  and  gold. 


3.  Sign  Vrisliabha  (Taurus)  represents  cloths  in  gene¬ 
ral,  flowers,  wheat,  rice,  barley,  buffalo  and  cows;  and  sign 
Mithuna  (Gemini i)  represents  the  autumnal  crops,  creepers, 
the  root  o£  the  Lily  and  cotton- 


4,  Sign  Karkataka  (Cancer)  represents  Kbdravn,  plan- 
tains,  bent  grass,  fruits,  roots,  leaves  and  bark;  and  sign 
Simba  (Leo)  represents  foo  l  grains,  juice,  the  skin  of  the 
lion  and  the  like  animals  and  jaggery. 


5.  Sign  Tvanva  (Virgo)  represents  common  flax,  barley, 
liorso  gram,  wheat,  kidney-beans  und  nishpava  (a  kind  of 
leguminous  plant — Dolichos  tetraspennus) ;  and  sign  Tula 
(Libra)  represents  black  gram,  wheat,  and  mustard  seed. 


6.  Sign  Vrischika  (Scorpio)  represents  sugar-canes, 
web  grains,  metals,  and  woollen  fabric;  and  sign  Dhauus 
(Sagittarius)  represents  horses,  salt,  cloth,  weapons,  gin  jelly  - 
seeds  and  roots. 


7.  Sign  Makara  (Capricorn ns)  represents  trees,  bushes, 
wet  grains,  sugar-canes  gold  and  black-lead  ;  and  sign  Kum¬ 
bha  (Aquarius)  represents  waterfruits  and  flowers,  gems  and 
articles  of  various  shapes. 


8.  Sign  Meena  (Pisces)  represents  pearls  and  other 
shell-gems  diamonds,  various  oils  and  fishes. 

9.  If  Jupiter  should  occupy  the  4th,  10th,  2nd,  11th, 
7tb,  9th,  or  5th  house  from  any  particular  sign  of  the 
Zodiac  or  if  Mercury  should  occupy  the  2nd,  llth,  10th,  5th, 
or  8th  house  from  any  particular  sign  > 


10.  Or  if  Venus  should  occupy  the  6tb  or  7th  house 
from  a  particular  sign,  the  articles  represented  by  that  sign 
will  perish  ;  and  if  he  occupies  any  of  the  other  houses,  the 


XmiHAT  BAMHITA. 


[CH* 


<SL 


icies  will  flourish  ;  if  malefic  planets  should  occupy  the  3rd, 
Oth,  10th,  or  llth  house  from  a  particular  sign,  the  avticies 
represented  by  that  sign  will  flourish  and  the  reverse  will 
be  the  case  if  the  planets  occupy  any  of  the  other  houses- 


U.  If  powerful  malefic  planets  should  occupy  any  of 
the  houses  other  than  the  3rd,  6th,  10th,  and  11  ih  houses 
from  a  particular  sign,  the  articles  assigned  for  that  sign 
will  sell  dear  and  become  scarce, 

12.  Generally  if  benefic  planets  should  be  powerful 
in  their  several  signs  as  stated  above,  articles  will  flourish 
and  the  prices  will  bo  moderate  and  the  articles  themselves 
can  be  had  easily. 

IS.  If  at  any  time  a  particular  sign  should  be  within 
sight  of  benofic  planets  occupying  malefic  houses,  the  rr ticlos 
assigned  for  that  sign  will  not  be  much  in  jured,  but  if  the 
planets  should  be  powerful  malefic  planets  the  articles  will 
perish. 


CHAPTER  XLII. 

On  the  Pbicb  of  Commodities. 

i  .  Judging  from  the  phenomena  of  excessive  rain,  of 
meteoric  falls,  of  the  appearance  of  the  Danda,  of  Hales.  of 
eclipse  nrd  parhelion  occurring  on  the  New  or  Full  Moon 
day  cf  a  particular  month ; 

2.  Tho  astronomer  shall  determine  that  the  price  of 
commodities  will  rise;  but  if  the  phenomena  should  occur 
on  any  other  days  of  the  month,  rulers  will  be  at  war. 

3.  If  tho  phenomena  referred  to  above  should  occur 
when  the  dun  is  iu  the  sign  Mesha  (Aries),  April — May,  a 
tradesman  shall  purchase  the  produce  of  Sarat ;  and  if  the 
phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in  Vrishabha 
(Taurus),  he  shall  store  up  wild  roots  and  fruits ;  and  if  he 


BB1HAT  SAMHJTA. 


,s?r6uld  dispose  of  these  articles  in  the  fourth  month  after 
purchase,  he  will  make  much  profit. 

4.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Mifchuna  (Getoinii),  the  tradesman  shall  store  up 
juicy  articles  and  grains,  and  if  he  should  sell  thorn  in  the 
sixth  month  ho  would  make  much  piofit. 


5,  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is 
in  the  sign  Karkataka,  he  shall  store  up  honey,  perfumes, 
oil,  ghee  and  sugar,  and  if  he  should  dispose  of  them  in.  the 
Second  month,  they  would  fetch  double  their  value  ;  but  if 
ho  should  dispose  of  them  before  or  after  the  second  month, 
he  would  sustain  loss* 


G*  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Simha  (Leo)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  gold, 
gems,  leather,  armours,  weapons,  pearls  and  silver,  aud  if  ho 
should  dispose  of  these  in  the  fifth  month,  there  would  bo 
much  profit  ;  but  if  he  should  do  so  either  before  or  after  tba 
fifth  month,  he  would  sustain  loss, 

7.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Kanya  (Virgo)  the  tradesman  shall  purchaso  Oha- 
mara  (fan),  asses,  camels  and  horses;  if  ho  should  dispose 
of* them  in  the  sixth  month,  he  would  get  double  their  value. 

8.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  sign  Tula  (Libra)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  yarn 
goods,  crystal  wares,  flowers  of  gold  color  and  grains  ;  if  he 
should  dispose  of  them  iu  tho  sixth  month,  ho  would  get 
double  their  price. 

9.  If  the  phenoraena'should  occur  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  nigh  Vrischika  (Scorpio)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up 
fruits  and  roots  of  a  lasting  nature  and  various  precious 
stones,  and  if  he  should  dispose  of  them  at  the  end  of  two 
y  ears,  they  would  fetch  double  their  price. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


tCH  a 

10.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  tho  Sun  is 
Dhatms  (Sagittarius)  the  tr  adesenan  shall  stove  up  conch 
sbel  i'>,  corals,  articles  of  crystal  and  pearls;  if  he  should 
dispose  of  them  in  the  sixth  month,  they  would  fetch 
double  their  price. 


11.  If  the  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is 
in  the  signs  of  MakaVa  (Capricornus)  and  Kumbha 
(  Aquarius)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  iron  and  other 
metals,  vessels  and  grains  ;  if  ho  should  dispose  of  them  at 
tho  end  of  a  month  they  would  fetch  double  their  price. 

12.  If  tho  phenomena  should  occur  when  the  Sun  is 
in  Mcena  (Pisces)  the  tradesman  shall  store  up  roots,  fruits, 
vessels  and  precious  stones;  if  he  should  dispose  of  them 
in  the  sixth  month,  they  would  fetch  double  thoir  price, 

lb'.  If  the  Sun  or  Moon  should  happen  to  be  in  a 
single  sign  accompanied  by  an  Afcimitra  (very  friendly) 
planet,  the  tradesman  may  deal  profitably  in  the  articles  as¬ 
signed  for  that  sign. 

14.  If  the  Now  or  Full  Moon  should  either  be  accom¬ 
panied  by  or  williin  view  of  benefic  planets  the  price  of 
commodities  will  Vise.  If  the  Sun  should  be  either  accom¬ 
panied  by  or  within  view  of  malefic  planets,  the  price  will 
fall.  Generally  predictions  are  to  bo  made  on  a  full  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  strength  or  weakness  of  tho  Zodiacal 
signs. 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

On  Indra  Dhwaja  or  Indba’s  Banner. 

1,  Tho  Devas  addressed  Brahmans  follows: — “  Lord, 
we  are  unable  to  defeat  the  Asuras  iu  fight  and  we  have 
therefore  come  to  thee  fur  help-1’  Brahma  spoke  to  the 
Devas  as  follows  :  — 


BRIIUT  SAMHITA- 


1 


<c  The  Supreme  Vishnu  of  the  sea  of  milk  will  give 
you  a  banner  at  the  sight  of  which  tho  Asuras,  your  ene¬ 
mies,  will  cease  to  oppose  you  in  battle.’’ 


3.  Tho  Devas,  including  the  great  Indra,  took  leave 
of  Brahma  and,  proceeding  to  the  sea  of  milk,  began  to  sing 
as  follows  the  praises  of  Vishnu  on  whose  breast  shone 
brilliantly  tho  Koustnbha  gem  : — 

4.  “  Lord  of  Lakshumi,  the  unthinkable,  thou  hast  no 
equal;  thou  art  omnipresent  and  thou  existest  iuvisibly 
diffused  through  the  bodies  of  alt  corporeal  creatures  ;  thou 
art  the  Supreme  Soul  and  thou  hast  neither  beginning  nor 
end.” 


5.  God  Naniyana,  pleased  with  the  praise  of  the 
Devas,  gave  them  a  Dhwaja  (flag-staff)  which  at  the  same 
time  served  both  as  tho  Sun  and  the  Moon  respectively  to 
the  lotus-like  face  of  the  Deva  and  Asura  females. 


f>.  Indra  was  mightily  pleased  to  accept  the  gift  of  the 
Dhwaja  which  had  its  origin  in  the  Tejas  (light)  of  Vishnu 
and  which  was  set  with  precious  stones  and  mounted  on  an 
eight-wheeled  car  shining  brilliantly  as  the  Summer  Sun. 

7.  Planting  erect  the  Dhwaja,  which  was  attorned 
with  a  girdle  of  small  bells,  with  garlands,  with  umbrellas 
and  with  a  huge  bell,  Indra  defeated  his  enemies  in  tho 
field  of  battle. 

8.  Indra  gave  the  Dhwaja,  which  was  of  bamboo  wood, 
to  Vasu,  tho  ruler  of  the  province  of  Ohcdi,  who  was  gifted 
with  the  power  of  flight  into  celestial  rogioas,  and  Vasu 
then  performed  pooja  to  tho  Dhwaja. 

9.  Indra, pleased  with  Vasus pooja  spoke  as  follows : — 
those  princes  who  might  go  through  a  similar  ceremonial 
worship  shall  become  as  prosperous  and  successful  rulers 
as  Vasu,  the  ruler  of  Cbedi- 


BRIfiAT  8AMFIITA. 


^  -.'&£/  10-  Tho  subjects  of  these  rulers  will  also  become 
happy  and  prosperous  and  be  freed  from  fear  and  disease- 
The  Dhwaja  itself  shall  indicate  the  course  and  nature  of 
future  events.” 


11.  By  command  of  Indra  the  ceremonial  worship 
of  tho  Dhwaja  has  been  gone  through  by  princes  desirous 
of  strength  and  victory.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  give  a 
brief  description  of  tho  same  according  to  the  Shustras. 

12.  On  an  auspicious  day  and  in  an  auspicious  hour 
and  Nakahatra,  the  astronomer  shall  leave  for  the  forest 
accompanied  by  tho  carpenter* * * § 

13.  He  shall  not  cut  any  tree  growing  in  flower 
gardens,  in  temples,  on  cremation  grounds,  on  public  roads 
on  sacrificial  fire-bites  or  trees  of  short  growth,  or  dried 
trees  or  trees  of  stinted  growth  at  the  top,  thorny  trees  or 
trees  surrouuded  by  creepers  and  over-grown  with  mistle¬ 
toes. 


34  He  shall  also  reject  trees  with  holes  in  which 
dwell  numerous  birds  and  trees  injured  by  the  wind  or  fire 
and  he  shall  reject  trees  of  feminine  denomination,  for  nil 
those  trees*  are  not  fit  for  the  staif  of  lndra's  banner- 


15*  Tho  live  tr>  es  Arjunn*,  Asvakarna*,  Priyaka+ 
Dhavat,  Udmnbara§,  are  suited  for  the  purpose.  Either 
one  of  these  or  some  other  well  known  tree  ; 

1C.  Or,  some  tree  growing  on  yellow  or  black  soil 
shall  be  selected  by  the  astronomer  who,  alone  and  at  night, 
approaching  the  same,  shall  touch  it  and  address  it  as 
follows 


*  A  *  alre-vdy  explained, 

f  Pjriyaka,  known  in  Tamil  a?  ~rftuaru>, 

X  Dhava— Acacia  Leacophloc*,  known  in  Tamil  as 

§  UdnmUara— The  tree  Ficus  Glomerate. 


BBIKAT  SAMHITA. 


u  May  it  be  well  with  the  demons  tlmt  dwell 
this  tree,  salutation  to  you  all,  accept  these  presents  and 
pleased  to  dwell  in  some  other  place. 


“18.  O  excellent  tree,  the  king  wants  thee  for  the 
construction  of  his  Indra*Dhwaja»  May  it  be  well  with 
thee.  I  entreat  thee  to  accept  of  this  honor.” 


19.  The  astronomer  shall,  facing  either  the  East  or 
North,  cut  the  tree  before  sunrise  ;  if,  while  cutting,  the 

should  produce  a  rustling  sound,  it  indicates  evil.  If 
the  sound  should  be  agreeable  or  loud,  it  indicates  good 

20.  If  the  tree  should  fall  on  the  East  or  North  side 
without  breaking  or  bonding  or  being  caught  by  a  neigh¬ 
bouring  treo,  the  ruler  will  become  triumphant  in  war.  If 
it  should  fall  otherwise,  the  tree  shall  bo  rejected. 

21.  He  shall  cut  off  four  inches  at  the  top  and  eight 
inches  at  the  bottom,  and  shall  then  put  the  wood  in  water. 
He  shall  then  remove  it  to  the  town  gate  either  in  a  cart 
or  on  the  shoulders  of  men. 


22.  If,  while  it  is  being  carried  in  a  cart,  any  of  the 
spokes  of  the  wheels  should  break,  the  king’s  army  will 
revolt ;  if  the  felly  of  the  wheel  should  break,  the  army 
will  suffer  destruction.  If  the  axle  should  break,  the  king’s 
wealth  will  suffer;  if  the  pin  or  bolt  (at  the  end  of  the  pole) 
should  break,  the  carpenter  will  die. 


23.  On  the  Ashtamy  (8th  lunar)  day  of  the  light 
half  of  Bhaclrap«da,  the  king,  accompanied  by  the  citizens, 
astronomers,  astrologors,  ministers  aud  priests  in  their 
robes, 

24.  Shall  cause  the  beam  to  be  carried  in  procession 
round  the  town  after  covering  it  with  a  new  cloth,  and 
adorning  it  with  flowers  and  perfumes,  sweet  music  playing 
all  the  while. 


BKIHAT  &AMH1TA. 

town  shall  be  adorned  with  flag*;, 
nn  l  garlands;  the  citizens  shall  till  be  merry,  the  street 
shall  be  kept  neat  and  clean  and  the  party  shall  be  accom¬ 
panied  by  dancing  women  in  their  best  attire. 

2G.  The  houses  arui  shops  shall  be  decorated  ;  Vedic 
hymns  shall  be  chanted  aloud  ;  dancers,  and  dancing 
masters  and  singers  shall  dance  and  sing  at  every  corner 
and  at  the  junction  of  roads. 

27.  It  the  flags  with  which  the  town  is  adorned 
should  happen;  to  be  white,  there  will  bo  success  jri  war;  if 
yoih  w,  there  will  be  disease;  if  of  mixed  color,  there  will 
also  be  success  in  battle,  and  if  red,  there  will  bo  wars  in 
the  land. 

28.  If  while  the  beam  is  carried,  it  should  be  struck 
down  from  its  place  by  a  frighten  ad  elephant  or  other 
animals  the  king  will  be  afflicted  with  various  ferns;  or 
it  children  should  clap  their  hands  or  animals  engage  in 
figlifc  there  will  bo  wars. 

29.  The  carpenter  shall  again  work  the  beam  into 
n  proper  shape  and  plant  it  over  the  place  prepared  for  the 
purpose-  The  King  shall  spend  the  Yekadasi  (11th  lunar) 
day  by  the  side  of  the  beam  without  sleep. 

&0.  The  priests,  dressed  in  white  robes  ami  turbans 
shall  perform  homa  (five  ceremony),  chanting,  hymns  in 
honor  of  Indrn  and  Vishnu  and  the  astrologer  shall  note 
the  indication'*  around  and  build  his  predictions  tlieron. 

31.  If  the  flame  of  the  homa  Are  should  assume  t ho 
appearance  of  bene  fie  objects,  if  it  should  emit  good  odour  * 
or  appear  bright  and  large,  it  indicates  prosperity  to  the 
King  nnd  not  otherwise.  I  have  treated  of  this  subject  in 
my  work  entitled  the  Yoga  Yatra.* 


*  A  ;nannacnpt  copy  cl  thi",  work  is  with  Dr.  Kern*  novr  in 
Holland. 


L*yd(|fn, 


Bit  THAT  SAimiTA. 

If  at  the  moment  of  the  final  ahati  (pouring  of 
ghee  into  the  fire)  tho  flame  should  appear  bright  ami  fine 
and  whirl  to  the  right,  tho  King  Will  become  the  solo  ruler 
of  the  entire  tract  of  land  watered  by  tho  Cringes  and  the 
Jumna  and  surrounded  by  sea*  on  both  sides. 

33.  If  tho  flame  should  be  of  tho  color  of  gold.,  of  the 
flower  of  Asoka,  of  Kurandaka  or  lotus  or  of  tho  color  of 
Yyduriya  or  the  blue  lotus,  tho  King  will  become  ao  prosper* 
ous  and  wealthy  that  the  dark  rooms  of  his  palace  will  bo 
illumined  by  the  rays  of  light  proceeding  from  abundance 
of  splendid  gems. 

34.  If  the  sound  of  tho  flame  should  resemble  that  of 
rolling  chariots,  the  sea,  tho  clouds  and  elephants  or  the 
sound  of  drum,  the  king  will  become  so  prosperous  that 
numberless  rutting  elephants  will  be  seen  rubbing  against 
one  another  in  the  direction  of  his  march  and  forming  one 
dark  scene  as  far  tho  eye  can  reach. 

35.  If  tho  flame  should  present  the  shape  of  a  pot, 
a  horse,  an  elephant  a  banner,  or  a  mountain,  the  King  will 
become  the  sole  ruler  of  the  country  to  which  the  Eastern 
and  Western  Ghauts  form  as  lips  and  tho  Himalaya  and 
Vi  nd  hay  a  mountains  form  as  breasts. 

26.  If  the  fire  should  smell  like  the  juice  of  elephants 
in  nut,  like  tho  earth,  the  lotus,  parched 'grain  or  honey,  the 
king  will  become  so  prosperous  arid  powerful  that  the 
ground  before  his  seat  will  be  lit  with  the  rays  of  the 
gems  iu  the  crowns  of  rulers  bending  in  submission  before 
him. 

87.  What  has  been  said  with  respect  to  the  homa 
fire  on  the  occasion  of  tho  ceremony  in  connection  with 
Indra  Dhwaja  applies  as  well  to  homa  fires  on  occasions  of 
nativity,  sacrificial  fire  ceremonies,  Graha  santy  (purification 
of  houses),  royal  marches  aud  of  marriages. 

23 


BIUEtfT  SAMHIXA* 


After  feeding  the  Brahmins  with  rich  and  sump 
tuous  meals  and  presenting  them  with  money,  the  prince 
either  on  uhe  12th  lunar  day,  when  the  Moon  is  in  the  as 
terism  of  Sravana  or  other  stars,  shall  have  Indra’s  banner 
duly  planted  in  its  place. 


39.  According  to  Manu*  images  known  as  InfiraV 
daughters,  and  seven  or  five  in  number,  shall  be  made  under 
the  direction  of  men  learned  in  the  Shastras ;  of  these  a 
figure  kuown  as  Nunda  shall  bo  attached  to  the  beam  at 
a  point  which  is  a  quarter  of  its  height  from  the  ground  ; 
another  figure  known  as  Up&nanda  shall  be  fixed  at  the 
middle  point  of  the  beam. 


40.  A  third  figure  known  as  Jaya  shall  be  placed  at 
a  point  alone  Nunda  whose  distance  is  ono-sixteenth  of  the 
height  of  the  beam  ;  a  fourth  figure  known  as  Vijaya  shall 
ho  fixed  at  a  similar  height  above  Upananda.  Two  more 
figures*  each  known  as  Vasundluira,  shall  be  fixed  at  the 
same  height,  the  one  above  .Taya  and  the  other  aboveo  Vijaya. 
A  seventh  figure  known  as  Sakragenitri  (Indra's  mother) 
shall  be  fixed  in  the  intervening  space,  one-eighth  of  the 
banner  in  height,  lying  below  the  central  point. 


41.  Tho  King  shall  further  cause  to  be  made  the 
several  ornaments  of  various  shapes  which  the  Dovasworo 
pleased  to  present  to  Indra’s  banner. 


42.  The  first  ornament  was  presented  by  Visvakarma. 
It  was  oblongular  in  shape  and  of  the  color  of  red  Asoka 
flower  ,*  the  second  was  presented  by  both  Brahma  and  Siva. 
It  was  a  girdle  of  various  hues. 


43.  Tho  third  was  presented  by  Indra.  It  was 
octagonal  in  shape  and  black  red  in  color.  The  fourth 
ornament,  known-as  Alosookara,  was  presented  by  Yama; 
it  wan  black  and  glossy. 


by  Vayu  ;  ifc  vvas  made  of  the  feathers  of  the  peacock  and 
looked  like  blue  clouds ;  it  was  a  bracolet  for  tho  upper 


arm. 

45.  The  seventh  ornament  was  preaonted  by  Subra- 
mania ;  it  whs  his  own  bracelet  ol  curious  make.  L  ho 
eighth  was  presented  by  Agni ;  it  was  of  the  color  of  fire. 

40.  Tho  ninth  was  presented  by  the  Moon  ;  ifc  was  made 
of  a  precious  slone  resembling  the  \  yduriya-  Tho  tenth  was 
presented  by  Twashta,  the  Sun  j  it  looked  like  tho  wheel  of 
a  chariot. 

47*  The  f eleventh  was  presented  by  Visvadovas;  ifc 
was  of  the  shape  of  the  lotus  and  was  an  ear  ornament. 
Tho  twelfth  was  presented  by  the  Rishia;  it  was  of  tho 
color  of  the  blue  lotus ;  this  was  also  an  ear  ornament. 

48.  The  thirteenth  was  presented  by  Jupiter  and 
Venus  >  it  was  a  head  ornament  j  it  was  a  little  bent  both 
nt  the  top  and  bottom,  but  broad  at  tho  former  end  ;  ifc  was 
red  and  was  of  tho  color  of  shellac- 

49.  The  several  ornaments  above  enumerated  have 
for  1  heir  lords  tho  several  Devas  by  whom  they  wore  res¬ 
pectively  presented- 

f  0.  The  first  ornament  shall  be  placed  at  a  distance 
from  the  foot  equal  to  a  third  of  the  circumference  of  the 
beam  ;  the  second  above  the  first  at  soveu-eigliths  of  the 
distance  of  the  former  from  the  foot  of  the  beam  ;  the  third 
above  tho  second  at  seven-eighths  of  the  distance  between 
the  first  and  second,  and  so  on. 

51.  On 'the  fourth  day  the  ceremony  shall  be  com¬ 
pleted.  The  following  mantras,  quoted  by  Menu  and  fouud 
m  the  Shasfcras,  shall  then  be  recited  : — 


fi 


BRIXTA.T  SAMH1TA- 


2*  *  ^lon  wer^  *d  one  time  pleased  to  accept 

ffft  of  a  variety  of  splonded  ornaments  made  by  the  ©evas 
a oco m pained  by  Siva,  the  Sun,  Yatnn,  Indra,  tho  Moon, 
fTubera,  Agni,  Varnna,  the  Jlishis,  the  Apsaras,  Sukra 
(Venus),  Guru  (Jupiter),  Subbramania  aud  others,  so  wo 
request  thoe  to  be  pleased  to  accept  now  of  a  similar  gift 
from  us. 


54.  Thou  art  Vishnu,  the  deity  that  exists  through¬ 
out  eternit}', — the  all-pervading  principle — who  appeared 
in  his  Varaha  Avatar.  Thou  art  Yarnn,  Agni,  Hiranva- 
garbha,  Indra  and  Jupiter. 

55.  1  invoke  the  all  knowing  Agni,  the  protecting 
India,  the  lord  of  the  Dovas,  who  is  knowing  under  the 
names  of  Sakkra  and  Vrifctrahara,  that  our  heroes  may  be 
successful. 


5(b  The  above  sacred  texts  are  to  be  recited  by  tho 
king  fasting,  on  the  occasion  of  the  completion  of  the 
ceremony,  of  planting  the  pole,  on  it  entry  into  town,  and 
when  it  is  bathod  and  adorned  with  flowers,  and  at  the 
closing  ceremony. 

° '*  ^  shall  bo  adorned  with  an  umbrella,  a 

dag,  mirror,  frnits,  crescent-shaped  jewels,  garlands  of 
flowers  plantains,  sugar  canes,  with  the  figure  of  the  tiger 
and  of  tho  lion,  with  the  various  ornaments  already  men¬ 
tioned,  and  with  figures  shaped  like  tho  window,  together 
with  tho  figures  of  theeigbt  ©ikpatis,  placed  around- 

J  iio  rope  shall  bo  unbroken  ,*  the  peg,  driven  into 
the  ground,  shall  be  of  strong  wood  ;  the  pole  shall  be 
secured  at  the  bottom  within  a  strong  wooden  frame¬ 
work,  and  the  figures  known  as  Indrirs  daughters  shall  also 
be  of  strong  wood.  All  these  having  been  secured  the  flag 
*hall  be  hoisted  up  amidst  the  joyful  noise  of  the  people, 
tlu  blessings  and  salutation  of  the  priests,  the  loud  sound 


jp.Vgjt]  BBT  It. AT  -AMHITA.  # 

kettle  tii  t  m,  of  tabor,  of  couch  shell  and  othm  imjsigtJ 
jBfe^urueuts,  the  sound  ol  Vedic  texts  chanteu  by  tho 
Brahmin  and  in  the  absence  of  any  iniliaptpi.ous  sound. 


60.  The  people  shall  offer  with  both  their  hand** 
fruits,  curdled  milk,  ghee,  fried  grain,  honey  and  flowers. 
They  shall  also  offer  their  salat  a '  iods  and  praises  and  shall 
assist  at  the  ceremony.  The  banner  shall  be  so  placed 
that  its  end  might  ho  bant  a  little  in  the  direction  of  the 
eneruey’a  city  that  he  might  become  powerless* 

61.  If  the  banner  could  be  raised  neither  hurriedly 
nor  too  slowly  but,  steadily,  and  so  that  the  garlands  and 
numerous  ornaments  might  not  be  injured,  ife  indicates  pros¬ 
perity  to  tho  king ;  if  otherwises  it  indicates  ovil  which  tho 
priests  shall  take  steps  to  avert  by  expiatory  ceremonies. 

62.  If  the  hawk,  the  owl,  pigeons,  crows  aud  vultures 
should  settle  on  the  polo,  tho  king  will  got  into  daugers 
and  difficulties.  If  the  blue  jay  or  kingfisher  should  rife  at 
the  top,  the  first  prince  will  suffer.  If  a  falcon  should-in  its 
flight,  strike  the  tip  of  the  pole,  the  king  will  lose  his  sight. 

63.  If  the  umbrella  should  break  aud  fall  down,  tho 
king  will  die.  If  bees  should  begin  to  deposit  honey  in  a 
corner,  thieves  will  increase,*  if  a  meteoric  fall  should  occur 
at  the  time,  the  king’s  chaplain  will  die;  if  a  thunderbolt 
should  occur,  the  queen  will  die. 


64.  If  tho  flag  should  accidentally  fall  to  the  ground, 
the  queen  will  die;  if  any  of  the  ornaments  should  drop 
down,  there  will  bo  drought  in  the  land;  if  the  pole  should 
break  in  the  middle,  I  he  chief  minister  will  suffer ;  if  it 
should  break  at  Bhe’top  ;  tho  king  will  suffer  ;  and  if  at  the 
bottom,  the  citizens  will  suffer. 

65.  If  the  pole  should  accidentally  happen  to  be  sur¬ 
rounded  by  smoke,  there  wilt  he  fear  from  destructive  fires  ; 


T3RIHAT  BAMniTA. 


[GH. 


should  be  surrounded  by  darkness,  the  land  will  fal 
to  some  serious  hallucination  ;  if  the  figure  of  the  tiger 
should  break  and  fall,  ministers  will  suffer  ;  if  the  pole 
should  break  and  fall  towards  the  north,  east,  south  and 
west,  the  Bralunin,  the  Kshatriyas,  the  Vysias,  and  the 
Sudras  will  suffer  respectively. 


3§L 


66.  If  the  rope  should  break  and  fall,  children  will 
suffer  ;  if  the  figure  known  us  Jndra’s  mother  should  fall, 
the  king’s  mother  will  die;  any  indications,  for  good  or 
for  evil,  occurring  at  the  time  and  connected  with  children 
and  travellers,  will  also  come  to  pass. 


67.  After  keeping  the  flag  hoisted  up  for  four  days, 
on  the  5th  day  the  king  shall,  after  due  pooja  to  it,  have 
the  flag  brought  down,  and  thus  close  the  ceremony  for  the 
well-being  of  his  subjects  and  his  army. 


68,  That  prince  will  have  nothing  to  fear  from  his 
enemies  who  duly  inspects  and  performs  the  ceremony 
connected,  with  Indra  Dhwaja,  which  was  duly  performed 
first  by  Vasu,  king  of  Chedi,  who  was  guted  with  the  power 
of  flight  into  celestial  regions  and  after  him  by  numerous 
other  kings. 


CHAPTER  XL IV. 

On  the  Lustration  op  Arms.* 

1  *  £oon  after  Bhagavan  Vishnu  rises  f  (from  bod)  to 
whom  the  clouds  form  as  eyebrows,  the  Sun  and  Moon  as 
eyes,  and  whose  naval  pit  is  like  the  lotus,  the  king  shall 
perform  the  ceremony  of  lustration  of  arms  for  the  health 
and  well-being  of  his  horses,  elophant9  end  subjects. 

•  A  military  am]  religious  coremony  held  by  kings  on  the  19th  of 
Aawny  j]a  before  taking  the  field. 

f.  This  in  the  11th  lunar  day  of  the  light  half  of  Krittika  when  Vish¬ 
nu  rhiea  from  sleep. 


iSi 


BSIHAT  BAMHITA. 


« 


The  ceremony  known  as  lustration  of  arms  shall 


Tie  performed  on  the  12th,  or  the  8th  or  full  Moon  day  of 
the  light  half  of  the  month  of  Karfcfeika  or  A  wayuja. 

3.  On  some  pure  spot  in  the  north-eastern  part  of 
the  town  shall  be  constructed  a  structure  of  fine  wood,  16 
cubits  high  and  10  cubits  square  at  the  top. 

4.  A  lustration  room  shall  also  bo  constructed  of  the 
timber  of  Sala  and  of  Udumbata  as  main  beams,  and  of  the 
branches  of  the  Kakuba  for  rafters  and  cross-sticks,  and  of  a 
thick  coating  of  gras*  with  an  arch-way,  adorned  with  a 
matiya  dhwaja  constructed  of  bamboos. 

5.  Bhnllataka ,  rice,  coshta  and  Siddkarta  (the  white 
mustard)  shall  together  bo  tied  to  the  neck  of  horses 
already  taken  to  the  lustration  room,  by  means  of  a  string 
for  the  health  of  these  animals. 

6.  Seven  days  shall  bo  spent  in  the  worship  of  sacri- 
hcal  fire  by  the  recitation  of  Vedic  hymns  sacred  to  the 
Sun,  to  Varuna,  to  Yisvadeva,  to  Brahma,  to  In  dr  a  and  to 
Vishnu  for  the  benefit  of  these  horses. 

7.  When  the  conch  and  other  musical  instrments  nro 
sounded,  the  horsey  should  not  be  allowed  to  get  frightened, 
nor  should  any  expressions  of  censure  bo  directed  towards 
them,  nor  should  they  bo  beaten. 

8.  On  the  8th  day,  to  the  south  of  the  wooden  struc¬ 
ture  and  east  of  the  shed  there  shall  be  formed  a  platform 
(a  fire  place)  surrounded  by  Kusa  grass  and  the  bark  of 
trees,  facing  the  north. 

9.  The  king  shall  cause  to  bo  put  into  tho  pots  sandal 
paste,  Koshta,  samanga ,  haritata,  vianasnla,  priyang%vacha * 
danti ,  amrila ,  an j ana,  rajani ,  suvamapunkpa,  and  agni- 
rmntha- 

Not**.-—  Stanza  9  ,*  Koshta  *  Cost  n  a  Arabicaa,  known  in  Tamil  ag 

Samanga :  Repeal  madder  :  <* „*3sr<9- 

Haritaii  t  Snlphuret  of  ftrgenit  : 


BRIHAT  SAMITITA. 


[cir. 


10.  Also  the  roots  of  Sveta,  of  Putvakosa,  of  Kata-m 
Ihura,  of  Trayamavn ,  and  of  Sahaderi ;  also  the  plants 
Nayakimma,  Swagupf.a,  Sotavaree  and  Somarajee. 

11.  And  the  king  shall  cause  duo  honors  to  be  paid 
to  the  pots,  offering  to  thorn  cakes  and  sweetmeats  made  of 
honey,  milk,  and  flour. 

1'2.  The  king  that  loves  wealth  shall  also  cause  to  bo 
offered  to  the  fire,  Almtis  of  the  dried  twigs  of  the  trees 
Kadira,  Palasa,  Oodumbara,  Kaslun ira,  and  Aswutha;  and 
the  ghee  vessels  shall  bo  made  of  gold  or  silver. 

13.  The  king  shall  sib  on  tiger  skin  near  the  fire 
facing  the  east  with  horses,  physicians  and  astronomers 
by  his  side. 

3  4.  The  laws  relating  to  the  fire  place  (Vedi),  to 
priests  and  to  fires  in  connection  with  the  Lustration  cere¬ 
mony  are  the  same  as  those  stated  in  connection  with 
Ytttra,  Gralmyajna  and  Indra  Dhwaja. 

15.  The  king  shall  adorn  with  white  new  cloth*, 
sandal  paste,  perfumes  and  garlands,  both  elephants  and 
horses  of  good  breed  and  priests  who  have  bathed. 


<SL 


Manassila :  Ri»darssenio : 

Priyangu :  Panic  srcd. 

Vac  ha ;  Orris  root : 

Panti  i  Tho  plant  Crotoa©  polynndrnm  :  <?«>/. 

Amrita:  Piper  longum  :  $*$40*#*.. 

Aryans  t  Balpharet  of  Antimony, 

Itnjani :  Cnremin  longs  .* 

Bnvarn»puwbp»  •  The  Glolie  amaranth  :  nma>^0. 

Agnjbftantha  j  Pronina  apinosa: 

‘StAdaa  10:  Sveta:  Acotiifcum  tevon: 

PtimakoRa  :  Aehyranthos  sapors  :  ®r*^j  *». 

Kataiubhara  :  The  plant  Bignonia  Tntlicft  :  mtii*  Jr*  ««?>#. 

Trnyarn  ma  :  a  medicinal  plant:  Ojvsalpioa  pnlcherima :  <&*$*•  *»*■&&*, 
Bahadevi :  Herbs  used  in  certain  rites  of  ablution  at  tho  consecration  of 
an  idol:  9* 

NVigaknaninit  *  Bottlers  tinctorifi  :  9^trsu^. 

Bwafprpta:  plant  Mtienna  prnitaa 

Satavaree  :  Asparagus*?  raw  moans  :  fi*sn*PtSc.i-rtr-. 

Somam^e  :  a  medicinal  plant  Serr&ttila  or  Vernonia  Anthelmintic*. 
TW-rJ.—Sfcanaa  12 :  Udamban*  :  (jg  tree  Picas  glomerate  :  fju&rm, 

Kasmira  ?  Ficna  elastics  wsraJkofti. 

The  other  terms  have  already  been  explained— Vide  pp.  Hi  to  143 


JPlillJAT  SAMBZTA* 


16,  He  shall, addressing  kind  words  to  these  and  with 
the  music  of  the  conch-shell  and  other  instruments  tako 
them  gently  to  the  platform  near  the  wooden  structure. 


17*  If  the  horse  thus  led  by  the  king  should  stand 
with  its  left  leg  lifted  from  the  ground,  the  king  would 
easily  triumph  over  hip  enemies. 


18.  If  the  horse  should  get  frightened,  the  king 
would  suffer  miseries;  the  effects  described  for  various 
other  indications  connected  with  elephants  and  horses  in 
tbo  work  on  Yoga  Yatra  apply  equally  to  the  Lustration  of 
arms. 


10.  The  priests  shall  give  to  the  horse  to  cat  a  rice 
ball,  touching  the  same;  if  the  horse  should  cither  smell  or 
eat  the  ball,  the  king  will  triumph  in  fight  and  will  suffer 
defeat  if  otherwise. 


20.  The  priest  shall  dip  a  twig  of  the  glomerous  fig 
tree  into  tho  water  jars  and  rub  it  over  the  bodies  of  tho 
horses,  chanting  the  Santifca  and  Ponshtika  mantras;  lie 
shall  similarly  rub  the  twig  over  the  army,  tho  elephants 
and  the  king  himself. 


.21.  Besides,  for  the  prosperity  of  tho  country,  the 
priest,  after  performing  homa  by  means  of  tho  abhichara 
mantra  shall,  with  tho  spoar,  stab  in  the  breast  a  figure  of 
the  enemy  made  of  earth. 

22.  The  priest  shall  then  touch  with  his  fingers  the 
bit  of  the  bridle  and  put  it  in  the  horse’s  mouth .  The  king, 
after  purification  by  Lustration,  shall  get  on  the  back  of 
the  horses  and  attended  by  his  army,  shall  proceed  towards 
the  north  and  other  directions  for  purposes  of  conquest. 


28.  Tho  king  cheered  by  gentle  winds,  rendered 
odorous  by  contact  with  the  juice  of  rutting  elephants  > 
pleased  with  the  music  of  the  drum  nnd  conch -shell ;  bright 

21 


the  rising  summer  sun,  from  the  numerous  sparkling 
gems  of  his  crown  ; 


24.  Resembling  Mount  Meru  with  its  swans  from  the 
moving  chamara  on  both  sides  j  with  garlands  and  clothes 
moved  to  and  fro  by  the  chamava  air  made  sweet  by  con¬ 
tact  with  sandal  paste; 

2  ).  Beautiful  as  the  rainbow  from  the  various  hues  of 
the  light  issuing  from  diamonds  and  other  gems  of  his 
crown,  ear  pendants,  aimlets  and  the  like  > 

2G.  Attended  by  horses  that  appear  to'  soar  aloft  in 
tho  sky,  by  elephants  that  with  their  tread  seem  to  cleave 
the  earth,  and  by  soldiers  resembling  a  host  of  the  Devas 
after  successful  battle,  and  himself  liko  Indra  shall  march 
on  horseback  for  purposes  of  conquest ; 


27.  Or,  adorned  with  jewels  set  with  diamonds  and 
pearls,  with  white  garlands,  turban,  sandal  paste  and 
clotlies  >  with  the  white  umbrella  spread  over  his  head  and 
mounted  on  the  back  of  a  huge  black  elephant,  thus  resem¬ 
bling  the  bright  Venus  with  the  Moon  near  it  and  over  tho 
dark  clouds,  he  shall  inarch  for  conquest. 


28.  The  king  who  marches  for  conquest  attended  by 
foot  soldiers,  cavalry,  and  elephants,  all  in  high  spirits  and 
with  numerous  bright  weapons  of  war  and  striking  terror 
into  Ihu  heart  of  the  euetny,  shall  easily  conquer  tho  earth. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

ON  THE  WAOTAtL.* 

1.  I  shall  hero  state  the  effects  of  the  first  appearance 
the  bird  kuowti  ns  Khanjana  (wagtail)  on  the  king’s  march 
ns  strted  by  Rishis. 

T  .3^®  iB  kti0ww  Khnnjttua  m  Sanscrit.  It  is  u  species  of 
wagtail.  Mount*  alia,  Alba.  * 


2.  Tf  the  bird  should  bo  one  of  the  species  possessing 


,5.1 


BRtllAT  8A1IHITA. 


IS 


a  large  body  and  a  long  and  black  neck,  ifc  is  known  as 
Bhadra  ;  it  forebodes  good  luck  ;  if  it  be  olio  of  the  species 
black  up  to  tho  neck  or  face,  it  is  known  as  Sampoorna;  it 
forebodes  success. 

3.  If  it  be  one  of  the  species  with  a  dark  spot  in  the 
neck  and  with  white  chocks,  it  is  known  as  Hilda  ifc  fore¬ 
bodes  evil.  If  it  be  yellow,  ifc  is  known  ns  Gopeeta ;  it  also 
forebodes  evil. 

4.  If  ifc  should  be  seen  on  trees  of  sweet  fruits  and 
fragrant  flowers  or  close  to  sacred  water,  or  on  the  heads  of 
elephants,  horses  and  serpants,  on  the  tops  of  temples  and 
on  tho  king’s  palace,  iu  flower  gardens  or  on  the  mansions 
of  the  rich ; 

5.  Near  cows,  cowpens,  gatherings  of  sadhus  or  holy- 
men,  sacrificial  lire  sites,  festival  places,  kings  , Brahmins, 
elephant-,  beds,  liorae-sheds,  an  umbrella,  &  flag-staff,  a 
chamara,  and  tho  like ; 

G.  Near  gold,  white  cloth,  places  adorned  with  the 
lotus  and  the  water  lily,  in  places,  washed  with  cowdimg, 
on  vessels  containing  curdled  milk,  or  on  heaps  of  grain, 
it  forebodes  prosperity  to  tho  king. 

7.  If  it  should  be  seen  near  swampy  places,  tho  king 
would  eat  sumptuous  meals;  if  on  cowdung,  fco  will  got  a 
good  supply  of  milk  and  curd  ;  if  on  green  tuif  ho  would 
get  good  cloths.,  and  if  on  chariots,  he  would  leave  hi2* 
kingdom. 

8,  If  it  should  bo  soon  seated  on  the  top,?  of  houses, 
the  king  would  lose  his  wealth  ;  if  on  snares,  he  would  b© 
pnpriboned;  if  on  impure  places,  he  would  suffer  from 
disease  ;  aud  if  on  tho  back  of  tho  sheep,  he  would  soon  ob¬ 
tain  his  desired  object 


UR! HAT  8AM1IITA. 


x.:-v  Q  I  £  ifc  should  be  soen  seated  on  the  back  of  a  buffa¬ 
lo,  a  camel,  an  ass,  on  the  bones  of  animals,  on  cremation 
grounds,  in  the  corners  of  houses,  on  pebbles  or  gravels,  on 
rocks,  on  the  walls  of  towns,  on  ash  and  ou  hair,  there 
would  be  deaths,  diseases  and  fears  in  the  land. 


10.  If  it  should  bo  seen  when  it  is  shaking  off  its 
wings,  there  would  be  misery  in  the  land  ;  if  when  in  the 
act  of  drinking  water  from  the  river,  there  would  be  pros¬ 
perity ;  there  would  also  bo  prosperity  if  seen  about  sun¬ 
rise;  and  if  about  sun  set,  tuere  would  bo  misery  in  the 
land. 


11’  If  the  king  should  march  in  the  dieeetion  in 
which  the  wagtail  should  be  seen  to  fly  immediately  after 
the  Lustration  ceremony  is  over,  ho  would  triumph  over 
liia  enemies. 


12.  Where  the  wagtail  should  bo  seen  to  copulate, 
there  would  bo  treasure  in  tho  ground  under;  where  it 
should  be  found  to  vomit,  there  would  be  crystal  beads  in 
the  ground  under  ifc;  where  it  passes  stool,  there  would  be 
found  charcoal  underground;  theso  may  be  found  to  bo 
the  case  on  actual  examination. 

13.  If  the  wagtail  should  bo  found  dead,  the  king 
would  die;  if  of  broken  limbs,  the  king  would  suffer  simi¬ 
larly  ;  if  covered  with  wounds,  a  similar  fate  will  befall  tho 
king;  if  found  to  enter  its  nest,  the  king  would  get  wealth 
and  if  perceived  iu  its  flight,  his  relatives  will  visit  him. 

14.  If  the  king  should  chance  to  see  in  some  pure  spot 
a  wagtail  foreboding  good,  he  shall  then  and  there  perform 
pooja  on  the  ground  with  saudal  paste,  flower,  and  perfum¬ 
ed  smoke  ;  he  is  then  sure  to  prosper. 

15-  I  fho  should  chance  to  see  a  wagtail  foreboding 
evil,  he  shall  perform  puja  to  Br.vbmins,  preceptors,  yogis 


IG.] 


BRJKA'C  3AHHITA. 


18 


1mA  the  Devas ;  he  will  escape  the  evil  effects.  He  shall 
abstain  from  meat  for  7  days. 

1G.  The  effects  of  the  first  sight  of  the  wagtail  will 
come  to  pass  within  a  year  ;  if  during  this  peroid  fclio  wag¬ 
tail  should  be  seen  again,  the  effects  of  such  secuud  sight 
will  come  to  pass  that  same  day  before  sunset ,*  in  making 
predictions  from  the  wagtail  the  astrologer  shall  take  into 
account  the  direction  of  its  flight,  its  place,  body,  the 
rising  Zodiacal  sigu  at  the  time,  the  Nakshatra  or  the  Moon’s 
place  at  the  time,  and  whether  the  bird  is  seep  with  its  face 
turned  to  the  on  or  away  from  the  sun. 


CHAPTER  XLVL 

On  Portbnth. 

A. 


Portents  connected  with  idols  pr  statues  of  the  Dcvas 
in  the  Temples* 

1.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  Laws  relating  to 
portents  which  Bhagavan  Garga  taught  to  Attri  >  what 
follows  is  a  summary  of  the  same. 

2.  Mankind,  because  of  their  sins,  suffer  misfortunes; 
and  the  approach  of  these  is  indicated  by  portents,  stellar, 
atmospheric  and  terrestrial ; 

3.  Mankind,  by  tbeii  misdeeds,  offend  the  Devas,  and 
the  Devas  send  down  portents  to  indicate  thoir  displeasure  ; 
the  king  shall  perforin  expiatory  rites  for  the  redress  of  the 
miseries  which  otherwise  are  sure  to  befall  mankind. 

4.  Unusual  phenomena  connected  with  the  planets 
and  stars  are  known  as  stellar  portents.  Meteors,  thunder¬ 
bolts,  tempests,  halos,  cloud  castles,  rainbows  and  the  like 
are  known  as  atmospheric  portents* 


BMHAT  8AMHITA. 


movable 


OfUOlOQ 

avoided 


Any  nnusual  phenomena  connected  with  Loth 
and  immovable  terrestrial  objects  are  known  as 
tittl  portent  s  Tho  effects  of  these  can  bo  avoided  by 
means  of  expiatory  rites,  whereas  the  effects  of  atmospheric 
ts  can  only  bo  softened  bywsucb  ceremonies,  and  in  the 
of  some  the  effects  of  stellar  portents  cannot  be 
or  softened  by  any  means. 


6.  Our  own  opinion  is  that  even  stellar  portents  can 
bo  assuaged  in  tho  vigour  of  their  effects  by  large  gifts  of 
gold,  food,  cows  and  lands,  and  by  drawing  down  the  milk 
of  cows  on  tho  temple  floor  and  by  a  crore  of  ahutis  in  the 
sacred  fire. 


7.  The  king,  in  consequence  of  his  sins  in  his  former 
birth,  will  bo  afflicted  in  his  own  person,  in  his  children, 
treasury,  vehicles,  citizens,  wives,  priests  and  subjects  at 
large. 

8.  If  the  Linga  and  the  Idols  of  the  Devas  in  tho 
temple  should  for  no  apparent  cause  break,  move,  perspire, 
shed  tears,  fall  down,  speak  or  do  the  like,  the  king's  coun¬ 
ty,  would  suffer  miseries. 


9.  If  on  festive  occasions  the  car,  the  axle,  the  wheel, 
the  yoke,  or  the  flag  should  break  or  fall,  or  if  any  of  them 
should  be  found  to  have  been  removed  from  its  placo  and 
another  put  in  its  stead,  or  if  the  tie  should  break  and  the 
parts  get  loose  or  if  tho  car  should  stick  into  the  ground 
and  refuse  to  move,  the  ging  will  suffer  with  his  country* 

10.  Portents  connected  with  the  idols  or  statues  of 
the  Rishis,  of  Tams,  the  Pitridevas  and  of  Brahma  will 
affect  tho  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas  and  the  Vysias.  Those 
Connected  with  tho  statues  of  Rudra  and  the  Dik  Faiakas 
will  affect  the  lower  animals. 


I  I.  Portents  connected  with  the  statues  of  Jupiter* 
j  j  Venus  and  Suturn  will  affect  the  family  priest.  Those  con- 


BRIIUT  SAMMTA.  IS  V 

with  the  statue  of  Vishnu,  will  affect  mankind  afc 
large.  Portents  connected  with  the  statues  of  Skandii  and 


Visaka  will  affect  the  provincial  rulers 


12.  Portents  connected  with  the  statue  of  Vedavyusa 
will  effect  the  minsters;  those  connected  with  the  statue  of 
Vi tiav uk a  will  affect  the  commanders  of  arimes ;  those  con¬ 
nected  with  the  statues  of  Dhata  and  Vidlmta  indicate  the 
destruction  of  the  world. 

13.  portents  connected  with  the  statues  of  the  sons, 
daughters,  wives  and  servant:*  of  the  DevaS  will  affect  bho 
king’s  son*,  daughters,  wives  and  servants. 

14.  Por-m.ts  connected  with  the  statues  of  the  Rak- 
shastts,  the  Pisacbas,  the  Yaksbas  and  the  N*ga$  will  aflcct 
as  bofbro  the  kings’*  sons,  daughters,  wives  and  servants. 
The  above  will  all  take  effect  within  eight  months. 

1  >,  When  any  unusual  phenomena  portentous  in  their 
nature  occur  in  connection  with  the  statu  os  of  Devas  in  tom  j 
plea,  tho  priests  slmll  bathe  and  fast  for  3  days,  and  with  a 
pious  mind  also  bathe  the  statues  m  water  and  adorn  them 
with  flowers,  sandal  paste,  cloth  and  the  like. 

16.  He  shali  satisfy  tho  Devaa  by  the  offer  of  Mad - 
Jhuparka,*  sweetmeats  and  cooked  rice,  and  lie  shall  throw 
ahtUis  of  boiled  rice  into  the  fire,  chanting  mantras  appro¬ 
priate  to  the  several  Devas. 


17.  That  kiug  who  for  seven  days  shall  perform 
homo,  feed  Brahmins  and  worship  the  Deras  accompanied 
by  music  and  dance,  and  who  shall  present  large  sums  of 
money  to  the  Brahmins,  shall  be  freed  from  tho  effects  of 
all  his  sins. 

B. 


Portent s  connected  with  fire. 

18.  That  prince  will  suffer  with  his  kingdom  in  whose 
province  a  tiro  breaks  out  where  there  is  no  lire  or  firo 

ceases  to  burn  even  when  fed  with  fuel.  _  ' 

*  M&dhn parka  a  mixture  of  lion (7  and  cianTiod  butter. 


milHAT  BAMmrA. 


[CH. 


Ji).  If  either  water  or  flesh  or  any  wet  subs  tar  ee 
should  catch  fire  and  burn,  the  king  will  suffer  miseries;  if 
weapons  of  war  should  catch  fire  and  burn,  there  would  bo 
war  in  the  land. 

20.  If  temples  and  palaces  of  kings  or  the  mansions 
of  the  rich,  archways  or  gates,  flag  staff  ami  the  like  should 
catch  fire  ami  burn,  or  if  these  should  do  so  being  struck  by 
lightning,  there  would  surely  be  a  foreign  invasion  of  the 
land  G  months  after  the  occurrence. 

21.  If  smoke  should  appear  in  a  place  where  there  is 
no  fire,  or  if  a  dust  storm  or  darkness  should  cover  the  land 
during  day  time,  or  if  the  stars  should  be  invisible  at 
night  when  the  sky  is  cloudless,  or  if  the  stars  should  be 
visible  during  the  day  time,  mankind  will  be  subject  to 
various  fears. 

_22.  If  fire  should  break  out  for  no  apparent  cause, 
towns,  quadrupeds,  birds  and  men  will  suffer.  If  beds, 
clothes  or  the  hair  on  one's  head  should  be  seen  to  smoko 
or  with  sparks  of  tiro,  there  would  be  deaths  in  tho  land. 

23.  If  woapous  of  war  should  be  seen  to  catch  fire,  or 
become  like  simkes*  or  should  sound  or  como  out  of  their 
case  or  quiver,  there  will  bo  fearful  wars  in  the  land. 

24.  When  portents  connected  with  five  occur  the 
king  shall  satisfy  god  Agni  by  horua  ceremonies,  throwing, 
into  the  fire  ahulis  of  the  twigs  of  milky  trees,  of  mustard 
seed  and  of  gheo,  and  he  shall  present  gold  to  the  Brah¬ 
mins. 


C- 

Portents  connected  with  trees . 


25.  If  the  branches  of  trees  should  break  and  fall 
down  for  no  apparent  cause,  there  would  bo  wavs  in  the 
Jand  ;  if  the  trees  should  bo  heard  to  laugh,  the  king  would 
quit  his  dominions;  if  they  should  he  heard  to  weep, 
diseases  would  increase. 


^K.  If  the  trees  should  bear  fruits  or  flowers  in  tne 


BBJHAT  PAMHITA. 


1 


wrong^soason,  the  country  will  be  attacked  by  the  enemy ; 
if  young'  trees  should  blossom,  children  will'perish ,*  il  the 
juice  of  trees  should  oo^e  out,  all  articles  will  suffer. 

27.  If*  toddy  should  ooze  out  from  trees,  the  king’s 
vehicles  will  suffer  injuries*;  if  blood  should  oo&o  out,  there 


will  he  wars  in  tho  land ;  if  honey,  mankind  will  suffer 


from  diseases;  if  oil,  there  will  bo  famine,  aud  if  water, 
there  will  be  great,  fears. 

28.  If  a  dead  tree  should  sprout  and  grow,  or  if 
aliying  tree  should  suddenly  die,  there  will  he  decrease  of 
strength  and  food  in  tho  land  ;  if  a  tree  which  has  fallen 
should  ris6  of  itself,  there  will  be  fear  from  diseases. 

29.  If  the  superior  trees  should  bear  blossoms  or 
fruits  in  the  wrong  season,  or  if  suelurecs  should  catch  fire 
or  smoke,  kings  will  be  killed. 

30.  If  trees  should  grow  like  serpents  or  talk,  man¬ 
kind  will  suffer  death.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected 
with  tiees,  the  effects  will  begin  to  be  felt  after  ten  mouths# 

3 1.  For  the  expiation  of  the  evils  the  priests  shall  honor 
the  tree  with  flowers,  sandal  paste,  perfumed  smoke,  cloths, 


and  the  like,  and  hold  an  umbrella  over  it,  and  placing  a 


Sivalinga  at’  its  foot  shall  perform  Itudrojapa  uud  offer 
to  the  fire  six  ahutis  in  honor  of  Kudra. 

32.  The  king  shall  feed  Brahmins  with  rice 
cooked  in  milk,  with  honey  and  with  ghee-  In  the  case 
of  portents  connected  with  trees,  tho  Ri.shis  have  directed 
that  tho  king  shall  make  gifts  of  land*  to  tho  Biahraius. 


'D. 


Portents  connected  with  Crops, 


S3.  If  the  stem  or  stock  of  the  lotus,  barley  and  the 
like  should  bo  found  to  divide  into  branches,  or  it  crops 
should  bear  double  fruits  or  double  flowers,  tho  owner  or 
proprietor  of  the  laud  will  die. 


25 


a  tree  should  b  w  a  variety  of  fruits  or  flowers,  the 
country  will  be  invaded  by  the  enemy. 

35.  If  the  gitigelly  should  yield  double  the  usual 
quantity  of  oil,  or  if  tfuclt  seed  should  contain  no  oil,  or  if 
ricu  should  bo  found  without  flavor,  mankind  will  suffer 
from  great  fears. 


36.  Flowers  or  fruits  portentous  in  their  nature 
should  bo  removed  beyond  the  limits  of  the  village  or  town. 
In  such  cast's,  the  priests  shall  satisfy  God  Soma  by  the 
offer  of  rice  a  hut  is  to  the  fire  or  hy  animal  sacrifices. 

37.  In  the  case  of  any  portents  connected  with  crops, 
both  the  crops  and  the  land  should  be  presented  to  the 
Brahmins*  In  the  middle  of  the  vpry  land  the  king  shall 
sat  isfy  the  earth  by  the  offer  to  the  fire  of  rice  ahuti:  the 
ovil3  will  then  disappear. 


E. 


Portents  connected  with  Rainfall. 

3S.  Drought  forebodes  famine;  excessive  min  fore¬ 
bodes  muttering  from  hunger  and  foreign  invasion  ;  rainfall 
iu  the  wrong  season  forebodes  disease,  and  rainfall  from  a 
cloudless  sky  forebodes  the  king’s  assassination. 

39.  When  the  seasons  are  otherwise  good  the  presence 
of  heat  in  the  place  of  cold  or  that,  of  cold  in  the  place  of 
heat,  or  the  absence  of  either*  forebodes  that  6  months  after 
and  through  supernatural  interference  the  kingdom  will  be 
in  danger  and  mankind  will  suffer  from  diseases. 

40.  If  there  should  be  continued  rain  lor  7  days  in  a 
wrong  season,  the  chief  minister  and  the  sovereign  will  die  ; 
if  there  should  fall  a  shower  of  blood,  armed  men  will  en¬ 
gage  in  fight;  if  there  should  fall  a  shower  of  flesh,  bones, 
or  marrow,  mankind  will  sutler  from  pox  or  plague. 

41.  If  there  should  full  a  shower  of  grain,  gold,  skim 
fruits,  flowers  or  the  like,  maukind  will  suffer  from  various 


4G-3 


BRII1AT  8AMHJTA. 


195 


W 

fears,  ami  if  there  should  fall  a  shower  of  charcoal  or  dust, 
the  town  will  perish. 

4J,  If  when  the  sky  is  d m«l less,  there  shoo’d  fall  a 
shower  of  stones  or  of  creatures  of  ur.u-ual  appearance,  or 
if  there  should  be  either  a  drought  or  excessive  rain,  the 
crops  will  suffer  injuries  known  ns  Ed  ibadlut  * 

4l>.  If  there  should  fall  a  shower  of  milk,  ghee,  hone}', 
curdled  milk,  blood  oi  wirm  water,  the  country  will  meet 
with  ruin  ;  in  the  caso  of  a  shower  of  blood,  the  king  will  bo 
at  war. 

41-  If  when  the  sun  shines  bright  arid  when  lie  is  not 
hid  by  clouds  or  the  like,  objects  should  ho  found  to  cast  no 
shadows  at  tdl,  nr  ii  the  shadows  should  be  of  wrong  shaocs, 
the  cun  try  will  suffer  from  various  fears 

4-x  If  when  the  sky  is  without  clouds,  the  rainbow 
should  appear  at  day  or  night  in  the  east  or  west,  there  will 
be  a  great  famine  in  the  laud, 

46.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected  with  showers,  the 
priest  shall  perform  bourn  in  honour  of  the  Sun  and  of  the 
deities  presiding  over  the  clouds  and  the  winds;  and  the 
king  shall  ulso  give  to  the  Brahmins  grain,  rice,  cows  and 
gold. 

F. 

Portents  connected  with  Water. 

47-  If  rivers  should,  in  c  uiric  of  time,  recede,  from 
towns,  or  it  deep  lakes  in  the  neighbourhood  should  become 
dry,  such  towns  would  be  desert -d  by  i  he  inhabitants. 

4d#  If  rivers  should  be  seen  to  run  carrying  oil,  blood 
or  flesh,  or  if  the  water  should  be  found  veiy  muddy,  or  if 
they  should  bo  seen  to  run  in  opposite  direct  inns,  there 
would  be  foreign  iuvasiou  of  the  country  alter  six  months. 

4!/'.  If  wells  should  bo  found  to  Uiaxe,  to  smoke,  to 

*  Ko.i  ja<JLa  playuo,  distil,  drought,  escrows  rain,  swarm  of  ruts 
AuJ  fcr&igti  iavttAioa. 


DRITIAT  Si  WTt'l'A. 


[CB.  4 


b<»f,  to  weep,  to  call,  to  sing-  or  to  spring  wufakind  would 
stiller  from  plague  or  pox, 

uO.  If  water  should  ho  found  to  spring  from  places 
undug,  or  if  its  smell  or  flavor  should  differ  change,  there 
would  he  ureat  fears  in  the  land;  if  any  unusual  pheno- 
mena  should  occur  near  pieces  of  water,  there  would  also  ho 
groat  fears.  1  he  king  shall  perform  expiatory  rites  in  the 


<SL 


very  places  ns  proscribed  below. 

ol-  fn  the  capo  of  portents  connected  with  water, 
the  priest  shall  perform  houmin  honor  of Varuna,  reciting 
the  iuautvas  snored  to  him. 


G. 

Portents  connected  with  Births. 

■r>2.  Tf  two,  three,  four  or  more  children  should  be 
ooru  to  a  woman  lit  a  timo,  or  if  the  offspring  should  be  of 
defective  organs*  or  if  it  ■  ■  >  • , ,  with  extra  organs, 

the  country  would  suffer  miseries  as  well  its  the  family. 

5.*1*  if  a  mare,  a  she  camel,  a  buffalo©  or  a  cow  should 
bear  twins,  these  animals  would  perish  after  six  months;  in 
the  case  of  portents  connected  with  births,  Garga  has  pre¬ 
scribed,  iu  two  stanzas,  certain  expiatory  rites  ; 

o4.  Ho  (the  husband)  who  desires  prosperity  should 
banish  the  woman  to  foreign  'lands  and  should  satisfy  Brah¬ 
min-:  by  the  gift  of  what  they  are  fund  of,  and  shall  -dao 
perform  expiatory  homa  cecetuonies. 

55.  In  the  case  of  quadrupeds,  they  too  shall  be  sepa¬ 
rated  trom  the  herd  and  expelled  to  foreign  lands;  if  not, 

the  ruler  of  the  towns  as  well  as  the  herd  of  cattle  would 
pevisu. 

IT. 

Portents  connected  with  Quadrupeds- 

56.  Among  quadrupeds  if  an  animal  of  one  species 
should  copulate  with  one  of  another  and  procreate  issues 
cows  and  bir  ds  would  suffer;  if  either  bulls  or  cows  or  ddgs 
should  suck  each  other, 


brihat  samhita 


'*<SL 


;>7-  There  would  be  foreign  invasion  of  tho  country 
nfl-p.r  three  months.  Garga  baa  prescribed,  in  two  stanza?, 
Ceitar  atory  ri+OSt 

58.  'I  he  animals  sh  ill  either  be  rejected  or  cupelled 
to  foreign  lands  or  given  away  to  others.  Tho  Brahmins 
shad  also  bo  Satisfied  with  presents.  Japa  and  Ilotua 
ceremonies  shall  also  bo  performed. 

50.  The  priest  shall  satisfy  God  Dhata  by  the  offer 
to  lire  of  rice  and  by  animal  sacrifice  by  means  of  the 
l’l'  i  ju patya  mantras ;  Brahmins  shall  also  be  fed  largely  and 
giveu  money. 

I. 


Port  nig  connected  with  the  Wind. 

60.  If  vehicles  should  move  when  not  drawn  by 
horses  or  other  animals,  or  if  they  should  refuse  to  move 
when  so  drawn,  the  country  would  suffer  from  various  fears, 
and  the  army  would  perish. 

61.  If,  when  uustruck,  instruments  of  music  should 
be  heard  to  sound,  or  if  they  should  not  sound  when  struck 
or  produce  wrong  sounds,  thorn  would  bo  foreign  invasion 
or  tho  reigning  sovereign  w<»u  d  perish. 

62.  If  vocal  or  instrumental  music  or  the  sound  of  the 
drum  oratty  other  mysterious  noise  should  be  hoard  in  tho 
sky,  or  if  moving  objects  should  refuse  to  move  and  immo¬ 
vable  objects  begin  to  tuovo,  or  if  a  drum  should  be  found 
to  be  muto  when  struck,  the  ruler  would  sutler  q death, 
disease  or  defeat  in  battle. 

63.  If  raonk»y-iipes  should  be  seen  to  copulate,  or  if 
ladles,  winnowing  baskets  or  other  utensils  nIiquM  be 
heard  to  sound  in  an  unusual  m  inner,  or  if  a  jackal  should 
be  heard  to  howl,  there  would  be  wars  in  which  armed  mon 
would  engage  in  fight,  according  to  the  sages. 

64.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected  with  the  wind 
tho  king  shall  worship  a  representation  of  God  Vayu  made 


BR1  HAT  SAM  HIT  A 


[CH 


<SL 


of  the  flour  of  barley,  amt  shall  have  the  five  mantras  begin¬ 
ning  with  ‘'A'  avo’’  recital  |,y  Brahmins. 

<!“o  Ifo  shall  sat isfy  the  Brahmins  by  fending  them 
with  rice  cooked  in  milk  »uul  bv  the  gift  <>f  money  to  them, 
and  by  rice  horn  a-  ceremonies  shall  also  be  performed  and 
the  officiating  Brahmins  shall  be  paid  liberally. 

d. 

Portents  connected  with  An  imals  and  Birds- 


flfo  If  country  birds  shahid  begin  to  dwell  in  woods, 
or  if  wild  birds  should  begin  to  dwell  in  town <,  or  if  day 
birds  should  bo  found  to  move  about  at.  night,  or  if  night, 
birds  shot* Id  be  found  to  move  about  d nring  the  day, 

6/-  If  oil  her  nnimtds  or  birds  should  ho  found  to 
iiiove  in  circles  eiiher  immediately  before  sunrise  or  alter 
sunset,  or  if  they  should  bo  herd  together  and  liosvl  in  the 
direction  of  the  sun.  the  country  would  sutler  miseries. 

03-  If  dogs  should  be  found  to  cry  at,  the  gates  of 
houses  in  a  weeping  tone,  or  if  jackals  should  be  found  to. 
howl  facing  the  sun,  or  if  a  dove  or  owl  should  eater  the 
palace  of  the  king, 

6J).  If  the  cock  should  be  heard  to  cry  soon  after  sun¬ 
set,  or  if  the  cuckoo  should  bo  heard  to  cry  in  the  heinntuu 
(cold  ,  season,  or  if  the  hawk  and  the  like  birds  should  bo 
found  to  move  in  circles  from  right  to  left,  there  would  bo 
misery  in  the  hind. 

70.  If  birds  should  swarm  about  houses,  places  of  wor¬ 
ship,  towers  or  gates,  or  it  honoy-cmnbji  or  nut-hills  or 
lotus  should  bo  found  to  be  formed  or  to  grow  in  such  places, 
there  would,  bo  misery  in  the  land. 

7 1.  it  dogs  should  bring  within  human  dwellings  borics 
or  limbs  of  dead  bodies,  there  would  be  plague  in  the  land, 
it  am.i  als  and  weapons  should  be  found  to  speak,  the  king 
would  die,  and  the  t(i*!ioi  ol  old  say  as  follows  t 

72.  In  the  case  of  portents  connected  with  birds  and 


BTJIRAT  5AMHITA. 


190 


animals homa  (tiro)  ceremonies  shall  bo  performed,  and  tho 
officiating  Brahmins  shall  well  bo  paid.  B’ivo  Brahmins 
shall  bo  appointed  to  recite  the  mantra  beginning  with 
*'  Pevnbkapotn.’’ 

73.  A  large  number  of  cows  shall  be  presented  to 
Brahmins,  each  gift  being  mah*  by  the  recitation  of  the 
mantra  beginning  with  “  Sudevu.'’  Tho  Brahmins  shall 
ahso  bo  made  to  recite  S  ikuniso.  ktam  an  well  as  tho  Upani- 
shads  and  tho  Sivasaukuipu  mantras. 


K. 


Miscellaneous  portents. 


74.  If  In dra’s  banner,  bolts,  pillars  o?  gates  should 
breaker  fall  down,  or  if  doors,  towers,  flag-staffs  should 
bre*k  or  fall  down,  the  king  would  die. 

75.  If  both  tho  morning  and  evening  sky  should 
appear  to  bo  burning,  or  if  there  should  be  smoke  in  a  foivst 
where  there  is  no  fire,  or  if  ditches  should  appear  in  places 
w hero  there  were  none  In  fmv,  or  if  earth-quakes  should 
occur,  there  would  be  misery  in  tho  laud. 

70,  That  country  would  suffer  miseries  whose  rulot 
respects  heretics  or  atheists,  or  who  refuses  to  follow  tho 
rules  of  life  obaetvedbv  the  greet  and  holy  men  of  the  land, 
or  who  is  of  an  irascible  temper,  or  who  is  jealous  or  feaiful 
and  who  is  inclined  to  quarrel  with  his  subjects, 

77-  That  country  will  also  suffer  in  which  children 
are  found  with  weapons,  pieces  oi  wood  or  sticks  in  their 
hands  heating  (an i mats)  and  uttering  such  expressions  ns 
beat,  kill,  cut,  break  and  the  like. 

73.  That  house  will  meet  with  ruin  in  whose  wails 
figures  of  dead  men  or  of  the  master  of  the  house  is  drawn 
with  charcoal  or  red  chalk. 

79.  That  house  will  also  suffer  miseries  in  which  is 
seen  the  spider’s  web  or  which  is  uot  swept  cleau  and 


200  Bill  HAT  SAWHJTA.  [CH.  4 

jtdoiatMi  with  flowers  both  morning  and  evening,  or  in  which 
there  is  constant  quarrel  between  persons,  or  where  the  lady 
of  the  house  is  for  ever  dirty. 

vSO.  If  K.ikslmsfls  are  seen,  there  will  he  plague  in  tho 

land.  Garg'i  lias  prescribed  ceremonies  for  th&  expiation 
of  the  evils  of  all  miscellaneous  portents. 

81-  The  eighteen  Mdiasanti  ceremonies  (great  cere¬ 
monies  of  expiation)  prescribed  in  the  Adharvatia  Yeda 
must  be  performed.  Bali  (food)  shall  also  be  offered  iu 
honor  of  ludrannd  Imlrani  (Indra’a  queen)  who  shall  also  bo 
worshipped  in  every  month. 

L. 

1‘hcntmma  which  are  not  portent*. 

82.  If  after  the  occurrence  of  a  portentous  phenome¬ 
non,  either  the  king  should  die  or  tho  country  should  sutler 
mis  M  ien,  fr  if  a  comet  should  appear,  or  a  solar  or  lunar 
eclipsr  should  occur,  or  if  the  phenomenon  is  one  due  to  tho 
particular  season,  the  evils  described  for  such  phenomenon 
would  not  come  to  pass. 

8  .  What  phenomena  »re  not  portents  hut  are  due  to 
tho  pat  ocular  seutons  aro  brwetiy  stated  by  tho  sous  of 
Riahis  (m  the  following  12  aian?.es.) 

8k  IE  iti  the  Vasauta  Hi t u  (April — May)  there  should 
occur  a  thunderbolt  or  an  earth-quake,  or  it  the  i  oar  of 
thnucbr  should  be  heard  immediately  before  sun-riao  and 
alter  sun-set,  or  if  tho  appearance  of  a  halo,  dust-storm  or 
smoke  sli  mid  be  scon,  or  if  tho  sua  shouul  appear  veiy  r.  d 
both  at  vising  and  setting ; 

85.  Or  if  trees  should  yield  food,  juice,  oil,  honey, 
flo  Wei  a  or  fruits,  and  if  cows  uud  uirds  should  appear  Lust¬ 
ful,  there  would  be  prosperity  iu  the  land* 

m.  If  in  the  Greeshma  Riba  (summer)  shooting  state 
and  meteors  should  fall,  uud  the  discs  ot  the  sun  and  m  >ou 


should  appear  brown,  or  if  tilings  should  appear  to  burn  or 
smoke  or  covered  with  -sparks,  in.  the  absouce  of  fire,  or  if 
the  sky  should  be  full  of  dust  or  disturbed  by  tho  wind; 


b7.  Or  if  the  red  sky  of  the  morning  and  evening 
should  appear  disturbed  and  agitated  as  tho  sea,  or  if  rivers 
should  full  or  boc  »me  dry,  there  would  be  prosperity’  iu  tho 
land. 

88.  If  in  the  winter  season  such  appearance  us  tho 
rainbow,  halos  and  lightning  should  mark  tho  sky,  or  if  a 
dead  tree  should  sprout  aud  grow,  or  earth-quakes  occur, 
or  elevated  grounds  should  become  hollow  or  hollow  grounds 
should  become  elevated,  or  if  mysterious  noise  should  be 
heard  from  below  the  earth,  or  if  ditches  should  bo  funned 
ou  the  surface  of  tho  earth  ; 

89.  Or  if  tanks,  rivers,  ponds  and  tho  liko  should  be 
flooded  with  water,  or  if  >aach  water  should  overflow  tho 
banks,  or  if  landslips  occur  or  houses  should  break  and  fall, 
there  would  be  no  cause  for  fear. 

90.  if  in  tho  Surat  Ritu  (October  aud  November)  tbo 
wives  of  the  Devaa,  or  tho  Demons,  the  (J.mdharvas  or  tho 
vehicles  of  the  Devas  should  appear  iu  the  sky,  or  if  during 
tho  day  the  planets,  tbo  Com  tek  aliens,  or  any  of  the  stars 
should  become  visible ; 

91 .  Or  jf  music,  vocal  or  instrumental,  should  be  heard 
in  forests  or  on  hills,  or  if  crops  should  thrive  or  water  de¬ 
crease  in  quantity,  there  would  be  no  cause  fur  fear. 

9-.  If  iu  the  H eman ta  Ritu  (December  and  January) 
cold  winds  should  blow  or  snow  should  fall,  or  if  animals 
and  birds  should  he  heard  to  cry,  or  if  Rakshasas  and 
Y&ksbas  should  be  seen  or  voice  should  be’heard  in  tho  sky ; 

93.  Or  if  the  horizon,  the  sky,  the  forests  and  moun¬ 
tains  should  appear  dark  as  if  covered  with  smoke,  or  if  tho 
sun  should  bo  invisible  both  at  rising  and  setting,  there 
we  prosperity  uoubkia  the  land. 


26 


liOTUT  BAMtrm. 


feu.  4^L 


94.  It'  in  the  Sisivu.  Bittt  (February  nnd  March )  snow 
should  fall  or  portents  coimected  with  ait- should  Occur,  or 
any  unusual  or  wonderful  appearances  should  bo  soon,  or 
if  tiio  shy  should  appear  black  as  collyrimn,  or  if  shooting 
stars  or  meteor*  should  fall  ; 

95.  If  women  should  give  birth  to  children  of  un¬ 
natural  form,  or  if  cows,  sheep,  horses,  deer  or  birds  should 
do  the  same,  or  if  leaves,  sprouts  or  creepers  should  be  of 
unnatural  appearance,  there  would  be  prosperity  in  the 
land. 


9b'  If  unusual  phenomena,  due  to  particular  seasons, 
occur  in  such  seasons,  there  would  be  prosperity  in  the  land, 
arid  if  they  occur  in  other  seasons,  there  would  be  misery  in 
the  land. 

97.  The  utterances  of  mad  roon,  of  children  and  of 
women  will  nave;  fail  to  come  to  pass. 

9 S'  Words  of  truth  are  to  be  found  in  the  Devaa, 
from  them  they  come  to  men ;  human  words  are  therefore 
prompted  by  tho  Devasimd  are  therefore  true. 

99.  Even  though  ignorant  of  astronomy  and  astro¬ 
logy,  if  a  parson  should  be  well  1.  anted  in  the  laws  of  por¬ 
tents,  he  would  become  famous  and  would  be  liked  by  tho 
k’  -tg.  I  have  thus  stated  the  secret  views  of  the  Bishit  by 
a  thorough  study  of  which  one  acquires  a  knowledge  of  the 
pash,  of  the  present  and  of  the  future. 


CHAPTER  iXLVU. 

MAftmA  Chitmka  ok  Mihcei.laky. 

1.  I  have  stated  the  effects  of  a  number  of  stellar* 
atmospheric  aud  terrestrial  phenomena,  and  of  the  motions, 
conjunctions,  courses  au4  the  like  of  tho  planets  to  some 

ox  teat. 

2,  An  attempt  at  recapitulation  of  the  above  will  be 
deemed  a  fault  in  Varaha  Mihira,  who  is  so  well  known  for 


milHAT  FAMSITA 


his  brevity  »r*  composition.  It  u  .to  donbfc  improper  to 
restate  what  have  been  onco  stated,  but  Jyoutislmkas  will 
not  deem  ‘it  fault  on  the  present  occasion.  For  it  is  ft 


well  known  fact  that  every  work  on  Snmhite  must  have  a 
chapter  of  this  nature,  technically  known  as  Mayura  Chitra- 


kn. 


V"' 


3.  Mayttra  Ohitraka  is  a  repetition  of  what  has  been 
once  said.  If  1  should  omit  this  Chapter,  even  then,  I 
should  be  open  to  the  fault  of  an  omission  of  what  ought  to 

find  a  place  in  a  work  on  Snmhita. 

4.  ff  the  five  planet*  should  be  of  brilliant  appearance 
end  .should  pass  through  the  northern  path*  there  would  he 
prosperity  and  plenty  til  the  land  ;  if  they  should  bo  of 
dim  appearance  and  pass  through  the  southern  path,  '  hero 
would  be  famine  and  deaths  in  tho  land  and  mankind 
would  suffer  from  robbers. 

5:  If  Venus  should  pass  through  the  asterism  of 
r  passes  through  that  of  PoshySj  ruler# 
would  coa«©  to  be  hostile  with  ouo  another,  and  would 
become  happy  arid  the  people  would  be  freed  from  diseases 
and  would  become  happy. 


6.  If  the  moon  and  the  fivo  planets  should  oppress* 
any  of  tho  osunisms  of  Krittika,  Mftgba,  Rohini,  Slave  : a, 
and  Jyestha,  iniquity  would  prevail  in  the  western  coun- 


7.  If,  in  the  evening,  the  plan?  h  should  appear  of 
the  shape  of  a  flagstaff  in  the  eastern  sky,  the  eastern  rulej  i 
would  bo  at  wer  with  on©  another  ;  if  the  planets  should 
besoen  of  the  sums  shape  but  of  disagreeable  appearance 
and  in  tn id-heaven,  the  people  of  Madhyadesu  would  suffer 

___  #  ^  a  x  ■  »ie  i«»  >  w  nrrr-H- 

*  Oppress  :  This  mean#  cutting  through,  retrograde  motion,  conjaae* 
tiotio  ard  the  tike. 

t  Weatern  cons  tries  :  also  there  would  ho  iamiiic,  the  crops  would 
le  i!  iurti  rivers  would  become  dry 


BUI 71  AT  UluniTA 


ttpseries.  But  if  the  appearance  should  b< 
would  bo  no  suffering. 


[ctr.  41 


agreeable,  <  hero 


8.  If  the  planets  .should  so  appear  in  the  southern 
slcj,  there  would  be  drought  in  the  southern  counlries  ;  and 
ii  the  planets  should  appeal’  of  small  ugly  discs,  the  riders 
would  he  at  war  with  one  another  ;  but  if  the  discs  should 
he  large  and  bright,  there  would  he  prosperity  in  the  land. 

9.  If  the  planets  should  be  seen  of  bright  appearance 
in  the  northern  sky,  the  northern  rulers  will  he  freed  from 
evils;  but  if  the  discs  of  the  planets  should  be  small  and. 
of  ashy  color,  the  rulers  would  suffer  with  their  countries* 

10.  If  the  constellations,  the  stars  and  the  planets, 
should  appear  to  smoke,  to  burn  or  to  be  covered  with 
sparks  of  fire,  or  to  lose  their  light  for  no  apparent  cause, 
the  rulers  and  the  world  would  perish. 

11.  If  two  moons  should  be  seen  in  the  sky,  the  Brah¬ 
mins  would  prosper ;  if  two  suns  should  bo  seen,  the 
Kslmti  iyas  would  be  at  war  ;  if  three  or  four  suns  should 
be  seen  in  the  sky,  the  world  would  com©  to  an  ond. 


w 


12.  If  a  comet  should  b©  seen  to  pass  through  or  bo 
in  contact  with  the  constellation  of  Ursa  Major  (the  Septa- 
risk  is),  the  Abhijit,  the  Polo  star  and  tho  constellation  of 
dyealitr,  t  he  clouds  would  be  destroyed ;  there  would  ho 
good  deeds  m  the  land,  and  men  would  suffer  from  grief 
If  tho  comet  should  appear  in  contact  with  Ados  bn,  there 
would  be  drought  in  the  land  ;  and  the  people  with  hungry 
children  world  quit  their  countries  and  travelling  to  foreign 
lands  would  there  perish.  This  is  certain. 

19.  When  Saturn  is  scon  to  retrograde  through  any 
of  the  seven  a&fecrisins  from  Krittikn,  there  will  be  famine  In 
the  land  and  mankind  will  suffer  from  great  fears  :  friends 
will  become  hostile  to  ouo  another,  and  there  will  also  be 
droOg  bt  intho  land. 


14.  When  the  course  of  Saturn  or  of  Mars  or  of  a 
comet  should  lie  through  the  circle  (Sakata)  of  the  constel¬ 
lation  of  Rohini,  the  whole  world  would  sink  in  the  deep 
sea  of  misery  nod  perish  ;  and  how  can  l  adequately  describe 
the  condition  of  suffering  humanity  then  ' 

1.3.  If  a  comet  should  continue  visible  *  for  ft  long 
time,  or  if  it  should  pass  through  all  the  constellations,  all 
the  creatures  together  with  all  the  movable  and  immova¬ 
ble  objects  would  suffer  miseries  in  accordance  with  their 
previous  karma. 

IO.  If  the  moon  .should  appear  like  a  bow,  be  of 
disagreeable  aspect  and  o!  blood  color,  mankind  "■  >’<  1  u. 
fer  from  hunger.  People  living  in  the  direction  of  the  bow 

string  would  become  powerful  and  successful  in  fight.  If 

the  moord.H  horn  should  point  downwards,  cows  and  crops 
v*  .nr]  suffer;  if  it  ahold  appear  to  blaze  or  smoke,  rulers 

would  perish. 

17-  If  the  moon  should  appear  bright,  glossy  and  of 
large  disc,  and  if  both  her  horns  should  be  alike,  broau  arid 
elevated,  and  if  the  course  of  the  moon  should  lie  through 
the  north  of  tho  Naga  Veedhi  and  she  should  be  within  sight 
ofbenefic  planet*  and  free  from  d  o  influence  of  malefic 
ones,  mankind  would  bo  happy- 

kX  18.  If  the  coarse  of  the  moon  should  lie  to  tho  south 
of  the  asterism  of  Muglm,  Anuradha,  Jycshtlm,  Muckm* 
or  Chitra,  there  would  he  misery  in  the  land  ;  but  if  her 
course  should  lie  through  the  middle  or  to  the  north  of  the 
**me  asterismSj  there  would  be  prosperil  h 

IP.  The  line  of  clouds  across  the  sun’s  disc  at  rising  or 

ng  is  known  P&righa ;  Paridhi  is  also  kn  •  :  n  11 

trya  or  parhelion*  and  Banda  f$  an  appearance  A  the  ahaf* 
t  *  a  straight  rainbow- 


20.  The  long  ray*  of  oho  rising  or  sotting  sun  an 
known  m  Amogba  rays  and  IrnvaU  is  an  appearance  reseui 

.  long  t  triiight  broken  rainbow. 

21.  Sandhya  is  the  period  of  time  when  .tho  stars  con 
tiiiuo  invisible  both  before  snn-mo  and  after  sun-set 


22.  If  the  appearances  of  Parigha  and  tho  like  should 
be  seen  during  the  period  of  Sandin' a  (twilight),  there  would 
be  prosperity  in  the  hind,  and  if  tho  appearances  should  be 
glossy,  there  would  be  immediate  vain  ,  and  if  of  disagree-  . 
able  appearance,  tiioro  would  be  wars  and  tbo  like  in  the 
land. 


23.  If  tho  nppe  imnc  >  known  as  Pnrighn  shonld  be 
perfect  and  Unbroken,  if  the  sky  should  be  clear,  the  solar 
rays  blue  atm  glossy,  tho  rainbow  white,  and  if  lightning 
should  be  seen  in  the  north-eastern  sky,  and  if  the  appear* 
ance  known  as  Abmvrikslm  (cloud-tree)  should  be  glossy 
and  covered  by  the  rays  of  tho  sun,  and  if  the  evening  sun 
should  bo  hid  by  olouds,  there  would  be  immediate  rain. 


24.  The  re  would  bo  anarchy  in  that  country  in 
which  tho  sun  should  appear  broken  or  of  irregular  shape, 
or  black  or  small,  or  with  spots  of  tho  shape  of  the  crow  and 
of  disagreeable  aspect. 


25.  If  a  swarm  of  carnivorous  birds  should  follow  an 
army  marching  out  for  fight,  such  army  would  suffer  defeat 
in  battle,  but  is  the  birds  should  fly  before  the  army,  there 
would  be- success  in  battle. 

2d.  If  at  the  hour  of  sunrise  or  srmset  the  army 
restcmbHng  cloud  nast  ies  should  hided  he  solur  disc,  the  king 
would  bo  entangled  in  a  fearful  war. 


27.  If  birds  and  animals  should  cry  aloud  in  the 
direction  opposite  to  the  *u«t,  and  if  the  twilight,  sky 
should  be  of  bright  appearance  and  rendered  agreeable  by 


BRIHAT  SAMHTTA. 


207 


gentle  winds,  there  would  he  prosperity  in  the  land-  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  such  twilight  sky  should  be  covered  with 
dost  or  of  the  color  of  the  blood  or  of  disagreeable  appear¬ 
ance,  the  country  would  suffer  miseries. 

28.  Of  the  many  truths  stated  by  llifhrs  in  their 
Chapter  entitled  ’  May  ura  Ohifcraka,  I  have  rejected  these 
which  were  mere  repetitious  and  stated  the  rest.  Even 
after  heaving  the  musical  note  of  the  cuckoo  the  crow  is 
not  mute;  and  when  it  caws,  it  is  not  with  a  view  to  imi¬ 
tate  or  excel  the  cuckoo. 


Notk. — It  may  bo  well  to  add  here  certain  notes  relat- 
ting  to  tho  phenomena  of  nature  called  from  other  Sastras. 

There  will  be  famine  as  long  as  the  course  of  Jupiter 
and  that  of  Saturn  lie  through  the  end  of  tho  signs  Aries 

and  Scorpio  and  through  the  middle  of  Taurus  and  Leo- 

.  ■ 

During  the  period  when  Jupiter  and  Saturn  occupy  a 
•ingle  sign  of  tho  Zodiac,  there  would  bo  pestilence,  cholera 
and  death  among  the  people. 


As  long  as  Jupiter  and  Venus  continue  together  in  a 
state  of  do  appearance,  mankind  will  suffer  from  devils, 
diseases,  thieves  and  enemies. 

If  the  course  of  Saturn  or  the  reirogado  motion  of 
Mars  should  lio  through  tho  signs  of  Sagittarius,  Aries, 
Taurus,  Pisces  or  Leo,  there  would  be  such  deaths  among 
men  and  animals  that  only  a  third  of  mankind,  of  ele¬ 
phants,  horses,  cows  and  other  animals,  of  birds  and  of 
creatures  of  water  would  survive. 


If  the  mot  ion  of  Mam  should  be  an  accelerated  one, 
there  would  be  foar  from  destructive  fires;  if  he  should  re¬ 
trograde  and  enter  another  sign,  the  people  would  •  suffer 
from  heat  and  many  families  would  .oilier,  and  if  Lis  course 
should  Ho  through  a  aigu  longer  than  tho  calculated  period. 


liMHITA, 


would  be  drought  in  the  land  and  rulers  will  be  at 


II  -1  up  ter  should  retrograde  or  if  his  motion  should 
be  an  accelerated  one,  and  if  iu  this  state  he  should  enter 
another  sign,  tbo  rivers  would  not  bo  full ;  the  kings  would 
lose  their  glory  and  suffer  from  diseases. 


If  Saturn  aho  ld,  aft<  r  a  long  direct  course,  begin  to 
v  •  retrograde  or  have  an  accelerated  motion,  and  iu  this  state 
outer  another  sign,  there  would  ho  diseases,  famine  and 
drought  in  tin  land  an  1  vehicles  will  suffer  destruction- 


lr,  when  Jupiter  .should  outer  another  sign  when  in  his 
accelerated  motion.  Saturn  should  bo  in  bis  slow  motion, 
Venus  should  l  ave  disappeared,  and  Mercury  should  have 
reappeared,  the  country  would  perish, 

f  Saturn,  its  and  Jupiter  should  be  within  sight  of 
each  other,  men  withthoir  children  would  from  1 
and  from  weapons. 

If,  while  the  course  of  tho  sun  lies  through  the  end  of 
the  sighs  Taurus,  Uominii,  Scorpio  and  Led,  Jupiter  and 
Mirs  should  bt  in  conjunction  with  it,  mankind  would  suffer 
from  famine,  /md  tho  death  would  be  so  many  that  in  the 
cremation  grounds  of  villages  sad  towns,  Pisaoh&s  might  bo 
soon  with  hundreds  of  dead  bodies  in  tlmir  mouths. 


H  two  or  throe  or  four  planets  should  meet  together, 
people  would  Suffer  from  deuth  and  famine.  If  five  planets 
hliOtJd  meet,  there  would  also  be  famine  ;  if  six,  tbo  chief 
ruler  would  run  away  from  his  kingdom,  and  if  seven,  huma¬ 
nity  would  comtt  to  an  cud. 


it  the  course  of  Mars  and  Saturn,  through  tho  signs  of 
V  Cancer,  Leo  «nd  Pisces  should  be  retrograde  or  re-retrogt  ade, 
there  wv  aid  bo  much  suffering  ou  earth.  *  There  would  also 
be  a  scarcity  ot  water  and  wars  iu  the  laud  .*  grains  would 
be  destroyed  and  mankind  Would  suiter  from  tokbors- 


BE  III  AT  SAMHITA. 


48.] 


20$> 


]f  Ss.torn  and  Hahn  should  meet,  crops  would  be  injur¬ 


ed  ;  coin  modify  would  become  scarce ;  husbands  and  wives* 
wf>u)d  be  at  strife,  there  would  be  drought  and  famine  in 
tho  land  ;  COW'S  would  suffer  death  and  men  would  become 
exceedingly  ln».y. 

If  the  course  of  the  sun  and  moon,  both  of  brilliant 
discs,  should  lie  through  the  «  v*n  sstcrisnus  In  m  Kiittika, 
Marihyadesa  would  suffer  miseries. 


If  the  course  of  the  Snn,  tho  Moon,  Mars  and  Vena# 
ahould  lie  through  the  seven  asterisms  from  Maghn,  there 
would  be  grief  and  disease  among  men,  and  tho  Ood  of 
death  would  be  busy  in  bis  wide  work  ol  destruction  in  the 
southern  countries* 

IE  the  course  of  Jupiter,  the  Moon  and  Mercury,  all  of 
brilliant,  discs,  should  lie  through  the  seven  asterisms  from 
Anurndbtt,  the  weatern  eon  a  tries,  as  far  as  the  sea,  as  well  as 
tho  western  sea  itself  with  its  creatures,  would  suffer 
miseries  .  ^ 

If  tho  course  of  the  Sun,  Venus  and  Mara  should  lie 
through  the  seven  asterisms  from  Sn  vishta,  the  northern 
countries  would  suffer  miseries.  If  the  bonofio  plants 
should  appear  of  tho  color  of  gold,  the  Rrahmins,  th6 
Kshstrivns,  the  Vysiyns  and  the  Sodras  would  all  attend 
to  their  respective  duties  and  would  become  happy. 


This  brings  us  to  tho  end  of  Samhita  Proper  or  the 
first  bait’  of  Samhita.  In  this  jait  over  ona  thousand 
phenomena  of  nature  have  born  treated, each  of  which  must 
have  taken  the  ancient  Hindus  years  of  observation  and 
tabulation.  As  these  affect  the  well-being  of  bumamty,  a 
atudy  of  the  same  roust  be  calculated  to  add  to  human  hap¬ 
piness  ;  most  of  the  phenomena  might  appear  improbable 
occurrence,  but  it  would  ba  wrong,  judging  from  out 


JBItnUT  BAJum'A. 


L  $L 


limited  experience  of  Nature’s  ways  to  say  that  she  wilt 


nwvor  b(  ouQght  playing  this  trick  or  that,  or  guilty  of  this 
freak  or  that.  The  solar  spots  is  now  an  admitted  ftet. 
This  wa*  noon  followed  by  a  green  sun.  The  mysterious 
noise  heard  recently  in  parts  of  Southern  India  is  another 
instance  of  the  kind.  A  few  yours  ago  it  was  reported  in 
cert  do  newspapers  that  in  the  District  of  Cornwall,  Bng- 
land,  there  occurred  a  shower  of  flesh — vast,  fields  being 
found  literally  covered  with  flesh  several  inches  deep-  more 
instances  oS  the  kind  may  be  quoted.  Indeed  mysterious 
arefche  ways  of  nature,  ami  there  is  no  saying  what  she  may 
or  sin  may  not  be  capable  of.  The  present  volume  therefor* 
becomes  exceedingly  interesting,  as  it  embodies  in  a  small 


compass  a  vast  body  of  useful  and  curious  information 
regarding  ti  e  phenomena  of  Nature  together  with  their 
effects  aud  the  rneuua  for  removing  the  evils  thereof. 


The  second  part  wonld  be  more  interesting  to  the 
general  public,  A  variety  of  interesting  subjects  are 
treated  of  in  it.  It  would  bo  well  to  state  here  brielly  a 
few  ci  such  subjects: — 


The  Chapter  on  Pusbyasnana  treats  of  a  particular 
hath  for  the  king-  This  might  as  well  be  used  by  any 
y  e^8e  the  ingredients  to  bo  put  into  water  containing 
evidently  certain  magnotic.  properties. 

The  Chapter  on  the  Royal  Sword  contains  certain 
methods  for  tempering  cutting  instruments- 

The  Chapter  on  Anga  Vidya  relates  to  the  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  accidental  gestures,  movements,  utterances  and  the 
jiki;  of  man  especially.  It  rests  or  that  an  all- 

pervading  uoveraul  intelligence  speaks  in  a  thousand  ways, 
and  that  it  is  for  tnan  to  interpret  such  language  and  benefit 
himself  by  it.  Scoffers  twill  be  least  benefited  by  this 
chapter.  Earnest  auquirers  after  truth,  by  studying  this 


211 

pretty  correct 

prodictions. 

The  Chapter  on  Under  Currents  is  also  an  interesting 
one.  The  author  proposes  to  discover  the  position,  depth 
and  course  of  under-currents  from  tlio  appearance  of  the 
ground  above.  The  subject  requires  investigation.  If 
there  should  be  truth  in  tho  author  s  statements)  many 
of  the  tube  wells  and  boring  instruments  may  be  very  well 
dispensed  with. 

Equally  interesting  is  the  chapter  relating  to  the  plan¬ 
tation  and  growth  of  trees.  According  to  tho  author,  all 
seed  trees  can  bo  made  to  grow  like  creepers  by  preparing 
the  seeds  in  a  particular  way. 

Tho  bubject  of  bouse  building,  and  with  it  that  of 
the  preparation  of  strong  cements,  known  as  Vajialepma 
are  also  treated. 

The  author  then  treats  of  the  features  and  other 
qualities  of  superior  elephants,  horses,  dogs  and  the 
like.  In  this  connection  tho  subject  of  Samudrika,  which 
relates  to  the  determination  of  tho  fortunes  of  man  from 
the  marks  and  lines  of  his  body  and  of  which  palmistry 
is  a  branch,  is  also  treated- 

The  subject  of  the  kind  treatment  of  women  is 
then  taken  up.  Rules  are  also  laid  down  for  the  prepa¬ 
ration  of  scents  and  perfumes.  A  few  lines  are  devoted 
to  the  anbjeet  of  sexual  love  and  of  beds  and  cots. 

The  author  then  examines  the  qualities  of  superior 
diamonds,  rabies,  pearls  and  the  like. 

The  subject  of  omens  and  prognostications  is  also 

treated. 

The  above  is  by  no  means  ao  exhaustive  list.  While 
IV  t  )  is  instructive  Part  II  is  Interesting. 


immit  SA-Miim, 


brareh  of  the  science  will  be  enabled  to  make 


END  OF  PART  I. 


'■  W  m  «**'  X  *  •  -V  ’  ’  *  ■  * 


'Mm 


:  ifymp* 


( 


ryan  Miscellany. 

■  ■  w‘0^  >’  '  j 


4 


dv’< 


it  Series. 


THE 


B  R I HAT  SAME  I TA 

OF 

Varaha  MlHIRA. 

TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH 

BV 

N.  Chidambaram  Iyer,  b.  a.,  f.t.s. 

FOUNDER 

OP  THH 

TlRUVADl  JoTIKTANTRA  SABHA. 

PART  II. 


T Registered  Copyright .  ] 


Ebtas: 

WIKTtB'  AT  THE  FOSTER  VRFS6,  23,  RUNDAI.L  S  HOIO,  TITER t 

.  1885. 


. 


THK 

BRIHAT  SAMIHTA 

OP' 

VAR  AHA  MiHIRA. 

PART  II 


CHAPTER  I.  (48) 

Push v a  Snana  or  Rotax,  Hath. 

].  The  king  forms  the  root  of  the  troe  of  Soei  *y. 
As  the  Society  prospers  or  suffers  according  aa  the  king 
is  in  a  healthy  or  unhealthy  condition  of  mind  or  bod) , 
ho  becomes  an  important  subject  for  consideration. 

2  That  ceremony  of  purification  dictated  by  Brahma 
to  Brabaspati  for  the  benefit  of  lndra  and  learning  which 
Vridha  (i arga  taught  to  Bhagura,  hoar  now  from  mo. 

3.  The  priest  and  the  astrologer  shall  advise  and 
help  Hie  king  to  have  the  bath  known  as  Pushy  a  Bnauu. 
There  is  no  bath  as  effective  as  this  in  freeing  tko  king 
from  all  evils. 

4,  The  site  for  the  bath  shall  be  hoe  from  the  trees 
Siesimia  t  aka  Mind  Aksha.f  and  from  thorny  trees  and  trees 
of  pungent  and  bitter  flavor  as  well  as  trees  of  bad  odour; 
and  the  place  shall  also  be  free  from  owls,  vultures  and  die 
like  birds. 

y  Jjj  may  be  a  beautiful  forest  full  of  luxuiiunt 
tree*!#  shrubs  >  creepers,  thin  to  cur;  Is,  thick  foliage,  and 
of  Louder  leaves. 

G.  Or  it  may  be  some  pure  building  near  a  forest 
rendered  beautiful  by  the  pretence  of  the  cock,  the  phca>nnt, 
the  parrot,  the  peacock,  tbo  woodpecker,  tho  king-taker, 
the  huriiala  pigeons,  the  krikava  (a  kind  of  pa‘  .  ?idgr),  tho 

*  The  tro©  mtx&,  known  In  Tfimil  a#  ^r. 

4  jdiktfarpw#  Uimitrai,  luiowu  >n  Tamil  as  *'*£*«*- 


fjf  V  i 


BRIHAT  SAMflJTA- 


[CET. 


cuckoo,  the  fraucoline  partridge,  the  chataka,  the  manjula, 
the  turtle  dove  and  the  liko  ; 

'*!.  And  by  bees  intoxicated  by  sucking  the  lioney 
from  flowers,  and  by  the  cuckoo  and  the  like  ; 

8.  Or  it  may  be  the  beautiful  and  agreeable  beds 
of  rivers  with  lines  made  by  birds  at  play; 

1).  Or  it  may  be  by  the  side  of  a  tank  with  the 
hi oo  lotus  for  us  eyes,  the  jumping  swan  for  its  um¬ 
brella,  and  with  the  music  of  the  duck,  the  osprey,  and 
the  crane,  thus  resembling  Indra. 

1 0.  Or  it  may  be  by  the  side  of  a  tank  of  lotus  whose 
stem  resembles  a  girl  with  the  full  blown  flower  for 
her  eyes,  the  music  of  the  swan  for  her  voice,  and  the 
big  bods  for  her  bosom. 

1 1.  Or  it  may  be  a  cow  pen  rendered  agreeable  by 
the  falling  foam  from  the  mouth  of  the  cows,  by  their 
dung,  their  foot-prints,  and  by  the  skipping  of  the  new 
bom  calf. 


12  Or  it  may  bo  some  spot  on  tho  sea  beach  near  a 
harbour  full  of  tall  ships,  that  have  made  successful  voyages 
aud  rendered  pleasant  by  birds  living  in  the  hijjal  trees. 

13.  Or  it  may  be  the  sacred  hermitage  of  somo 
Rishis  in  which  the  lion  is  not  feared  by  the  doe,  and  in 
which  a  promise  of  protection  is  given  to  helpless  birds 
and  to  the  young  deer. 

1  I-  Or  it  may  he  some  human  dwelling  rendered  happy 
by  the  presence  of  a  beautiful  young  woman  whose  gait 
is  impeded  by  the  weight  of  her  girdle,  her  anklet  and  her 
heavy  hips,  whose  eyes  are  soft  as  those  of  the  deer,  and 
whose  voioe  is  sweet  as  the  musical  note  of  the  cuckoo- 

15.  Or  it  may  be  some  pure  and  holy  place  of  worship 
>  m  the  banks  of  sacred  rivers  or  flower  gardens,  or  some 
beautiful  ground  or  the  banks  of  rivers  flowing  from  west  to 
oast  or  from  south  to  north,  or  some  spot  where  the  rivet 
moves  in  a  curve  from  loft  to  right. 


fcRIHAT  8AMHITA. 


spot  free  from  ash*  charcoal,  bones, 
crab  holes,  hog  holes,  rat  holes  and 


17*  The  site  may  be  firm,  of  good  scent,  of  agreeable 
appearance  and  of  sweet  soil  and  even,  or  the  ground  may 
be  one  which  at  one  time  was  occupied  by  an  army,  it  such 
ground  were  of  the  description  given  above.  If  the  king 
performs  his  Pushy  a  Snaua  in  any  of  these  places  he  will 
triumph  in.  war, 

18*  The  JyoTittshaka,  the  minister  and  the  priest 
shall  leave  the  town  by  night  and  march  towards  the  north 
or  north-east. 


19.  There  the  priest  shall  perform  pooja  to  the  Dovas 
with  fried  grain,  colored  rice,  curdled  milk  and  flowers;  the 
mantras  for  the  invocation  of  the  Dev  as  have  also  been 
stated  by  the  Rishis : 

20.  I  invite  the  presence  here  of  all  the  Dev  as  whom 
this  pooja  might  please  and  in  whose  honor  this  pooja  is 
performed — -the  Dik  Dcvas,  the  Nagft  Devas  and  the  Prah- 
rnana  Devas. 

21.  On  inviting  the  Devas  as  prescribed  above,  the 
priest  shall  address  them  as  follows  :  you  shall  all  receive 
pooja  again  to-morrow,  and  after  blessing  the  king  may 
depart. 

22.  After  offering  pooja  to  the  Devas  invited,  the 
party  shall  spend  the  night  at  the  spot,  and  the  interpre¬ 
tation  oi  the  good  or  bad  dreams  that  may  be  dreamt  is 
given  in  my  work  on  Yoga  Yatra. 

23.  The  party  shall  rise  early  next  morning,  and  pro¬ 
ceeding  to  the  forest  shall  procure  the  several  articles  re¬ 
quired  for  Pushya  Snaua,  and  there  are  slokas  of  Kish  is  on 
this  point: 

24.  On  the  ground  intended  for  the  bath,  the  priest 


BR1HAT  AAUIifTA. 


shall  draw  a  circle,  cover  it  with  gems  mid  mark  in  it. 

places  for  the  several  Devas. 

25  The  priest  shall  then  represent  in  the  circle  the 
figures  of  the  NagaK,  the  Yakshas,  the  Devas,  the  Pitris, 

O  O  v 

the  Gandharvas,  the  Upsarasas,  thellishis  and  the  Side  has. 

26.  Hi  shall  also  represent  the  figures  of  the  planets, 
the  constellations,  the  Rudras,  ilio  Saptainntus  (seven 
Mothers),  Subbrarmima,  Vishnu,  Visakhas,  the  Lokapnlas 

arid  the  wives  of  the  Devas. 

27.  The  figures  shall  be  made  <>f  various  agreeable 
arid  scented  colors,  and  the  priest  shall  perform  pooja  to 
them  us  prescribed  in  the  Sastras  with  sandal  paste, 
wreathes  of  flowers  aud  the  like. 


28.  He  shall  satisfy  the  Devas  by  the  offer  of  sweet- 
moats,  various  preparations  of  rice,  fruits,  roots,  natal, 
sweet  and  agreeable  drinks,  liquor,  milk  and  alcohol- 

20.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  Pooja  rules  con¬ 
tained  in  tl»e  Sistrus  ;  as  regards  Pooja  to  the  planets  tho 
rules  of  Gratia  Yagnarn  should  be  followed. 

30.  The  Pisachas,  the  Asums  and  tlie  Eakahasas  shall 
Vie  gratified  by  the  offer  of  meat,  rice,  toddy  and  tho  like- 
The  Pitris  shall  be  gratified  by  the  pouring  out  of  oil  over 
the  figures  representing  them,  by  eye  salve,  and  by  the 
offer  of  gingellv,  moat,  rice  and  tho  like. 

31.  The  Ilishis  shall  be  honored  by  tho  recitation  of 
tho  Sam  a  mantras,  Y»jur  mantras,  Rik  mantras,  and  with 
sandal  pa.de,  scented  smoke  and  flower  wreathes-  Tho  iNaga 
Devas  shall  be  honored  by  the  recitation  of  the  Asleshaka 
Yarnus,  and  by  the  offer  of  sugar,  honey  and  ghee. 


32.  Tho  Dcva--  shall  be  satisfied  by  the  offer  of  scoot¬ 


ed  smoke,  aliutis  of  ghee,  flower  wreathes,  goins,  praises 
and  prostration.  The  Gandharvas  and  Upsa rasas  shall  bo 
gratified  by  tho  offer  of  sandal  paste,  flower  wreathes  and 
scented  smoko. 


1.1 


liRIfIA'1  SAMHII'A. 


33.  I, 'lie  other  Dovns  shall  be  gratified  by  the  ofler  of 
various  kinds  of  food  eaten  by  all  Castes  of  men.  All  On 
Devns  shall  be  adorned  with  oord  amulets,  banners,  orna¬ 
ments  and  sacred  threads. 

84.  The  priest  shall  then  form  a  lire  on  the  western 
or  southern  side  of  the  circle  on  ground  prepared  for  the 
purpose,  and  shall  procure  a  quantity  of  the  lo; ' ;  ICusa  grass 
containing  no  inner  blades  and  other  requisites  for  the  fire 
ceremonies. 


35.  He  shall  procure  fried  grain,  oil,  colored  rice, 
curdled  milk,  honey,  mustard  seed,  sandal  paste,  flowers, 
scented  smoke,  yellow  pigment  (Goroohaua),  colly  riant, 
gingolly  seed,  and  the  several  sweet  fruits  of  the  season. 


£6.  Tie  shall  also  procure  ghee  and  rice  cooked  in 
milk, — all  in  earthen  plates,  and  with  all  the  above  shall 
perform  pooja  ou  the  western  side  of  the  Vedi  (prepared 
ground)  which  Vedi  shall  also  he  used  for  the  bath. 


37.  Ou  the  four  corners  of  the  Vedi,  shall  bo  placed 
strong  pots  with  whit©  threads  tied  found  their  neck  and 
with  their  mouths  covered  with  leaves  of  milky  trees  and 
fruits. 

38.  There  shall  be  placed  pots  filled  with  wafer  for 
Pusbyu  Senna,  into  which  shall  bo  thrown  gems  and  the 
several  substances  for  the  bath.  Garga  has  given  a  list  of 
the  substances  required  for  the  purpose, 

30.  The  seeds  or  roots  to  be  thrown  into  the  pots  are 
Jyotislunati,* * * § * * * *  Trayamana,t  Abhaya,|  Aparajit»,§  Jecva,;j 
Visve'Warij  Hatha, Samunga,  V ’.jays. ft 


♦  Jyotishmati,  TrigonoJla  foeauui  Graeenjn,  known  Iti  Tamil  as  tir&Qgticx 

f  Beit*#  already  explained, 

j  Ab>  aya.  Plant  Terminalia  gerifcrina. 

§  Aparajita,  Plant  Cliioria  tern  a  tea, 

jj  J«.  Gva,  probably  Jeevanta,  kind  of  pot  herb. 

%  Fatha  ;  a,  climbing  plant  possosaii  g  various  rnsrlicioal  properties. 

Cbypea  Herrin  ndrfolia,  u®<*0ar$sr  or 

ft  Vijaya ;  Orris  root.  *fyj***w. 


6  SRI  HAT  SAM  HIT  A.  [ou.  Pj; 

40.  Saba,*  Salmdevi,t  Poornakosa,+  Satavftri,§  Avish- 
tikn,||  $iv« ,11  Bhadra.§§ 

41.  Brahmi,**  Kshemn,ff  Aja,Ji  and  all  seeds  as 
well  as  gold  and  all  plants  and  juices  of  good  properties. 

42.  He  shall  also  put  into  the  pots  gems,  various 
fragrant  substances,  the  leaves  of  Vilva,  and  the  root  of 
long  pepper  and  creepers  bearing  good  names,  as  well  as 
silver  and  other  good  substances. 

43.  This  over,  the  skin  of  a  full  grown  fine  bull  shall 
be  spread  on  the  ground  with  the  head  towards  the  east. 

41.  Over  it  shall  bespread  the  skin  of  the  Yodha, 
over  it  again,  the  skin  of  the  lion,  and  over  it  the  skin  of 
the  tiger. 

45.  On  spreading  these  skins  one  over  the  other  on 
the  Vedi  in  an  auspicious  hour  while  the  iuoofl  is  in  the 
asterism  of  Pushya,  the  king’s  throne  (seat)  made  purely  of 
gold  or  silver  or  copper,  or  of  the  wood  of  milky  trees,  shall 
be  placed  over  the  skins. 

47.  The  height  or  the  seat  may  be  either  a  cubit  or  a 
cubit  and  a  quarter  or  a  cubit  and  a  half  ;  if  the  seat  be 
of  the  height  mentioned  above,  the  king  will  triumph  over 
his  enemies,  will  be  the  ruler  of  vast  tracts  of  laud,  and  wid 
be  happy  and  prosperous. 

48.  Gold  shall  be  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  seat  and 
the  king  shall  sit  over  it  with  a  happy  and  peaceful  mind 
surrounded  by  ministers,  friends,  priests,  astronomers,  aged 
citizens,  and  persons  bearing  agreeable  names- 

♦  Salta  :  the  Aloe  plant, 

+£§  Already  explained. 

|j  Arishtika  :  The  Soap  berry  tree. 

%  Siva  :  Cicca  disticha. 

§§  Bhadra  :  a  fragrant  grass,  Cypenia  rotnndus. 

B rah  mi  :  plant  Elerodeudrtim  siphowanthus  :  •* 

ft  Kshema  :  a  kind  of  perfume.  »$&£**&** 

j$  A  ja  :  a  plant  whose  bulb  resembles  the  adder  of  i* 


BBWAT  SAMHITA- 


7 


1*3 

49.  The  heralds  shall  sing  aloud  the  praises  of  the 
king  and  the  Brahmins  shall  chant  hymns  from  the  Vedas, 
and  with  these  shall  be  sounded  the  drum  ari  l  the  conch 
shell  driving  away  all  evils  from  the  king. 

50.  The  king  shall  be  dressed  in  new  white  silk 
clothes,  and  the  priest  shall  spread  over'  Him  a  woollen 
shawl,  and  pour  over  him  several  pots  of  ghee  after  dedicat¬ 
ing  the  same  to  the  Devas. 

51 .  The  number  of  the  ghee  vessels  shall  bo  eight,  twenty  - 
eight  or  one  hundred  and  eight.  Tf  this  number  is  in¬ 
creased,  there  will  bo  an  increase  of  prosperity.  There  are 
mantras  for  the  ghee  bath  stated  by  Rishis- 

52.  Ghee  is  stated  to  bo  light ;  it  washes  oft’  sius  ;  it  is 
the  food  of  the  Devas,  and  the  world  continues  to  exist 
by  it- 

53.  May  all  the  sins  committed  by  thee  in  your  incar¬ 
nations  on  the  Earth,  in  Swarga  and  in  the  middle  region 
be  washed  off  by  contact  with  ghee. 

54.  The  priest  shall  then  remove  the  shawl  from  the 
king’s  person  and  shall  bathe  the  king  in  the  holy  waters 
of  Pnahya  Snana,  strewn  over  with  fruits  and  flowers, 
chanting  the  following  mantras. 

55.  May  the  ancient  Siddali  Devfts,  Brahma,  Vishnu 
and  Rudra,  the  San hya  Devas  and  the  Marnt  Devas  bathe 
thee  in  the  holy  waters  of  Pushya  Snana. 

56.  May  the  twelve  Adityas  (suns),  the  eight  Vasus, 
the  eleven  Bndras,  the  two  Aswam  Devas  {celestial  phy¬ 
sicians),  Aditi  (the  mother  of  the  Devas),  Swaha  (the  wife 
of  Agni),  Siddhi,  and  Saras  wati  bathe  thee  in  the  holy  waters 
of  Pushya  Snana. 

57.  May  Iveerti,  Lakslimi,  JDhriti,  Sree,  Sinivalee, 
Kuhn,  Danu  (the  mother  of  A  suras),  Surasa  (the  mother  of 


Bum  AT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  1. 


the  Kakahasas).  Vinatu  (the  mother  of  Gardda),  Kadi  u  (the 
mother  of  the  serpents),  bathe  thee  in  the  holy  waters  of 
Pnshya  Snana. 

58.  May  the  other  wives  and  mothers  of  the  Devus 
nob  mentioned  above  and  all  the  Apsarasas  bathe  thee  in 
the  holy  waters  of  Pnshya  Snana.  , 


59.  May  the  deities  presiding  over  the  Nakshatms, 
over  the  Muhoortas,  the  Pakshas  (fortnights),  the  Ahora- 
tras  (day  and  night),  the  Sandhis  (periods  of  interval),  the 
Samvatsams  (years),  the  Varas  (weeks),  the  Kala*,  the 
Kashthas,  the  Kshanas  and  the  Lavas  bathe  thee  in  the 
holy  water  of  Pnshya  Snana. 


60.  May  all  the  'Devas  presiding  over  various  other 
divisions  of  time,  may  the  Devas  moving  in  their  celestial 
vehicles,  may  the  Manus  and  the  Sagaras  bathe  thee  in  the 
holy  waters  of  Pnshya  Snana. 


61.  May  the  Saptarishes-with  their  wives,  the  Devas 
residing  in  the  Palar  regions,  may  Marichee,  Atri,  Pulahn, 
Pxitast.ya,  Kratu  and  Angirasa, 


62.  May  Brjgu,  Sanatf  Knmara,  Sanaka,  Sanandana, 
Smatana,  Daksha,  Jaigishavya,  Bhagaodara, 


63.  MayEkatn,  Dwita,  Trila,  Jabaleo,  Kasyapa,  Dur- 
vasa  (above  control),  Kanva  and  Katvavana, 

64.  May  Markandeya  of  great  devotion,  Sunasyepa, 
Vidooratha,  Oorva,  Samvartaka,  Chyavaua,  Atri  and  Para. 

sar.i, 


63*  Dvyapayana  (Yyasa),  Yavukreeta,  Devaraja, 
his  younger  brother  and  other  Ilishis  learned  in  the  Vedas 
and  who  act  up  to  them, 

66.  With  i  heir  disciples  and  their  wives  Vial  he  t  hee 
in  the  holy  waters  of  Pnshya  Snana,  as  well  as  the  deities 


Bllin AT  SAMHITA. 


9 


presiding  over  mountains  trees,  creepers,  sacred  places  of 
devotion  or  worship. 

67.  May  the  Devas  presiding  over  largo  rivers,  the 
Nagas,  the  Kimpnrushas,  the  renowved  Vyghanasas  (a  sect 
of  Vanaprasblias)  and  the  birds  of  the  air, 

68.  May  Prajapaii,  Diti,  the  all  useful  cows,  the  vehi¬ 
cles  of  the  Devas  and  the  spirit  presiding  over  the  whole 
Universe  and  over  movable  and  immovable  objects, 

69.  May  also  the  Agnis  (fires),  the  Pitri  Devas,  the 
Stars  and  the  Spirits  presiding  over  the  clouds,  the  sky,  the 
several  directions  or  points  of  the  compass  and  other  De- 
Vas  of  fame, 

70.  Pat  he  thee  in  the  holy  waters  of  Pushya  Snana 
and  thereby  free  thee  from  all  evils  ,  may  they  bless  thee 
with  long  li£$,  health  and  happiness. 

71.  There  shall  then  be  recited  the  Rudragana  man¬ 
tras,  the  Kusmamla  mantras,  the  Maharouhina  mantras, 
and  mantras  sacred  to  Kubera,  all  referred  to  in  Adharva 
Kalpa ; 

72.  Aiso  the  three  mantras  beginning  with  Apohistha 
and  the  four  mantras  beginning  with'  HiranyavVrna,  shall 
be  reoited.  After  the  bath  the  king  shall  wear  a  couple 
of  cotton  clothes. 

73.  The  king  shall  then  perform  the  Achamanya 
ceremony  and  pooja  to  Deva,  to  his  Guru  and  to  the  Brah¬ 
mins,  and  he  shall  pay  due  honors  to  his  umbrella,  to  hia 
banner  and  weapons— -sweet  music  playing  all  the  while. 

7i.  “  Ayuahyam  Varchasyam”  and  “  Royasposha”  and 

other'  Riks  shall  then  be  recited,  and  the  king  shall  then 
dress  himself  in  military  attire. 

75.  I  he  king  shall  then  proceed  t,o  the  second  Vedi 
and  take  his  seao  on  skins  which  shall  bo  laid  ono  over  the 
other  as  follows*. 


2 


KRtniT  aAWniTA-  feu  1 . 

76.  The  bull  skin  shall  be  laid  next  to  the  ground  ; 
over  It  shall  be  laid  the  akin  of  the  eat ;  over  it  again  the 
akin  of  the  Kuru  (a  kind  of  deer)  ;  over  it  the  skin  of  the 
spotted  antelope  ;  ovor  it  again  the  skin  of  the  lion,  and 
over  it  the  skin  of  the  tiger. 

77.  Tho  priest  shall  perform  the  homa  (fire)  cere¬ 
mony  offering  to  the  fire  dried  twigs,  gingelly  seeds,  ghee 
and  the  like,  reciting  riks  sacred  to  Iiudra,  Indra,  Brahas- 
pati,  Vislmu  and  Vayu. 

73.  Tho  astrologer  shall  note  tho  several  indications 
connected  with  the  Homa  fire  and  make  the  predictions 
as  stated  in  the  Chapter  on  Indra  Dhwaja,  and  the  pri«at, 
after  completing  what  might  remain  of  the  ceremony,  shall, 
with  clasped  hands,  speuk  out  as  follows  : 

79.  May  the  Devas  on  receiving  due  poojo  from  the 
king  bestow  blessings  on  him  and  depart. 

30.  The  king  shall  please  the  astrologer  and  the 
priest  by  the  gift  of  large  sums  of  money,  and  he  shall  also 
present  money  to  tho  other  Brahmins  learned  in  the  Vedas 
according  to  their  merit. 

81.  The  king  shall  then  give  liis  subjects  assurances 
of  good  government,  and  shall  rol case  from  jail  all  prisoners, 
excepting  those  who  may  have  been  just  then  punished  ior 
offences. 

82.  If  the  Pasbya  Sauna  be  repeated  every  month 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  astorism  of  Pnsbya,  tho 
king  will  enjoy  increase  of  wealth,  health  and  fame.  If 
the  Pnshya  Homa  ceremony  be  performed  when  the  Moon 
passes  through  any  other  astorism,  the  king  will  only 
enjoy  one  half  of  the  good  effects  prescribed  for  it. 

S3.  On  the  occurrence  of  portents,  of  eclipses  and  of 
planetary  conjunctions,  the  king  shall  have  the  bath 
known  as  Pushy  a  ISnana, 


It  2.]  BlvtHAI  SAVffTTA.  U 

8*1.  There  are  no  portents  whoso  evil  effects  arc  irre¬ 
mediable  by  Pushya  Snana  and  there  arc  no  ceremonies 
calculated  to  do  a  king  as  much  good  ns  the  ceremony  of 
Pushya  Horan. 

'  83.  The  king  that  desires  an  increase  of  power  and  the 

king  that  desires  sons  will  be  benefited  by  Pusliya  Snana. 

Sf» .  Thus  have  been  stated  by  Brahaspati  to  India 
the  rules  relating  to  the  ceremony  of  Pushya  Snana — for  the 
increase  of  his  family  and  of  his  wealth. 

87.  That  king  who  bathes  in  tho  waters  of  Pushya 
Suaua  his  elephants  and  horses  will  have  these  animals 
freed  from  all  evils  and  become  prosperous. 


CHAPTER  II.  (49i 

On  Patta  or  Crown  Pi.  vn:  * 

1.  Able  writers  have  fully  treated  of  the  subject  of 
Patta.  I  shall  here  give  a  summary  of  their  statements, 
not  omitting  however  the  important  points. 

2.  That  it  may  do  good,  the  king’s  pntfca  shaft  be  8 
inches  broad  in  the  middle,  the  queen’s  shall  be  7  inches 
broad,  and  the  prince’s  shall  bo  6  indies  broad. 

3.  The  general’s  shall  be  4  inches  broad  in  tho  middle. 
Tho  Prasa dapattz  (which  is  worn  by  a  person  as  a  token 
of  royal  favor)  shall  be  2  inches  broad.  Thm  pa  it  as  are 

five  in  number. 

4.  If  the  patta  were  made  of  pure  gold,  and  twice  ass 
long,  with  its  sides  half  as  broad  as  the  dimension  at  tho 
middle,  it  would  make  the  wearer  happy. 

5.  Tho  king’s  patta  shall  have  five  points  or  crests  ; 
the  queen’s  and  the  prince's  shall  have  three  crests  ;  the 


*  A  frontlot  or  ftilct  worn  round  tho  head. 


ncral’s  shall  have 
shall  have  no  crest. 


HR  THAT  SAMHITA. 

a  single  crest  and 


.  *  K$A  ViWjjWf-, 

[ch.  3 
the  Prasadapatta 


6.  If  gold  plute  while  being  beaten  out  for  the  patta 
should  extend  easily,  the  king  would  enjoy  an  increase  of 
prosperity  and  success  and  his  subjects  too  would  be  happy. 

7.  If,  while  being  beaten  out,  the  plate  should 'bo 
wounded  in  the  middle,  the  king’s  life  mid  power  would 
suhtr  destruction.  If  it  should  break  either  at  the  middle 
or  at  the  aides,  there  would  be  misery  aud  the  plate  should 
be  rejected. 


8.  If,  while  the  patta  is  being  made,  ovil  omens  should 
occur,  the  learned  astrologer  shall  prescribe  expiatory 
ceremonies  for  the  benefit  of  the  king.  If  good  omens 
should  occur  at  the  time  there  would  be  an  increase  of 
territory. 


CHAPTER  III.  (50) 

On  the  Sword- 

I-  A  sword  50  inches  long  is  a  good  one  and  one  25 
inches  long  is  a  bad  one  ,*  the  measurement  is  to  bo  made  by 
means  of  the  inch  scale.  Marks  at  the  odd  inches  would 
produce  evil 

2.  Marks  along  the  back  of  the  sword  of  the  shape  of 
the  Bilva  tree,  n  platter,  an  umbrella,  a  sivalinga,  pendants, 
a  lotus,  a  banner  and  a  weapon  of  war,  are  indicative  of 
prosperity. 

3-  Marks  of  the  shape  of  a  lizard,  a  crow,  a  heron,  a 
liawk,  a  headless  trunk  and  a  scorpion  are  indicative  of  evil 

4.  A  sword  that  is  broken,  or  short,  or  blunt,  or 
split  at  the  back,  or  ill-formed  or  without  sound,  is  indica¬ 
tive  of  evil  ;  if  otherwise  it  indicates  good  luck 


BRIHAT  RAM  HIT  A 


3.] 


13 


5.  If  the  sword  should  sound  like  lyre,  the  king 
would  die  •;  if  it  should  come  out  of  the  scubbaril  of  itself, 
tho  king  would  be  defeated  iu  battle  ;  if  it  should  move 
forward  of  itself,  there  would  be  wars  iu  the  land  ;  and  if  it 
should  appear  to  shine  brilliantly,  there  would  be  success  in 
battle. 


G-  The  sword  shall  not  bo  taken  out  for  no  purpose  ; 
nor  shall  it  be  rubbed  against  a  substance,  nor  shall  its 
edgo  bo  looked  at,  nor  its  price  stated,  nor  the  place  of  kx 
manufacture  mentioned,  nor  shall  it  be  compared  to  any¬ 
thing,  nor  shall  it  be  touched  by  a  person  who  is  impure. 

7.  That  is  a  good  sword  which  resembles  the  tongue 
of  the  cow,  or  the  petal  of  the  blue  lotus  or  the  leaf  of  the 
bamboo  or  assafoetida,  or  one  whose  end  is  pointed  lilco 
the  end  of  a  spear  or  round. 

8.  After  making  a  sword  of  the  prescribed  dimen¬ 
sions,  it  shall  bo  rubbed  against  a  whetstone  that  it  may 
not  be  broken.  If  it  should  break  about  the  hilt,  tho 
master  would  die,  and  if  about  the  end,  his  mother  would 
die. 


S*  If  thoro  bo  a  mark  in  tho  handle  of  the  sword, 
there  will  also  be  a  mark  in  the  sword  itself  just  as  a  spot 
on  the  face  of  a  woman  indicates  the  presence  of  a  spot  on 
her  privity. 

10-  If  a  querent  wearing  a  sword  appear  before  an 
astrologer,  tho  latter  shall  determine  the  marks  of  the  sword 
from  the  particular  parts  of  his  body  which  the  querent 
may  happen  to  touch. 

11.  If  the  part  of  the  body  touched  should  be  tho 
head,  there  would  be  a  mark  in  tho  first  inch  of  the  sword  ; 
if  it  be  the  forehead,  there  would  be  a  mark  in  the  2nd  inch  ; 
if  the  eyebrows,  there  would  be  a  mark  in  the  ord  inch  ; 


;t nit  if  it  should  ho  the  eye,  there  would  he  a  mark  in  the 
4th  inch, 

12-  If  the  part  touched  should  be  the  nose,  the  lips, 
tbo  cheek,  the  ohin,  the  rars,  the  neck,  the  shoulders,  'he 
breast,  or  the  armpit,  then  there  would  be  marks  on  the 
sword  iu  the  5th»  6th,  7th,  8th,  Dth,  10th,  11th,  i 2 1 h,  or 
13th;  inch  respectively'.  , 

13.  If  the  part  touched  should  bo  the  nipple,  the 
Peart,  the  belly,  the  abdomen,  the  navel,  its  root  the  lower 
belly,  the  hips,  or  the  privity,  then  there  would  be  marks 
on  the  sword  in  the  14th,  15th,  Kith,  1 7th,  18th,  19ib,  -Otb, 
or  21st  inch  respectively. 

14.  If  the  part  toached  should  be  the  two  thighs, 
their  middle  parts,  the  knees,  or  the  shanks,  there  would 
be  marks  on  the  sword  in  the  22ud,  23rd,  24th  or  25th  inch 
respectively. 

15.  If  the  part  touched  should  be  the  middle  of  the 
shanks,  the  ankle,  the  heels,  the  feat,  or  the  toes,  there 
would  bo  marks  oil  the  sword  in  the  2dth,  27th,  28th,  21Hh 
or  SOth  inch  respectively.  The  above  aro  the  views  of 
Garga. 

16.  The  marks  m  the  several  inches  of  the  sword 
from  the  first  to  the  5th  indicate  respectively  the  death 
of  the  sou,  acquisition  of  wealth,  loss  of  wealth,  prosperity 
and  confinement- 

17.  The  marks  in  the  several  inches  from  the  6th  to 
the  ISth  indicate  respectively  the  birth  of  a  son,  dissen¬ 
sions,  the  getting  of  an  elephant,  thodoath  of  a  son,  the  ac¬ 
quisition  of  wealth,  the  loss  of  wealth,  the  getting  of  a  wife, 
aud  mental  pain  or  grief. 

18.  The  marks  in  the  several  inches  from  the  14th 
to  the  21st  indicate  respectively  gain,  loss,  gaiu  of  a  wife, 
torture,  increase,  death,  joy  aud  loss  of  wealth. 


HfilHAT  SAMHTTA. 


[oh. 


B BIHAT  SAWIIITA. 


i  5 


19.  The  marks  iu  the  several  inches  from  the  22nd 
to  the  30th  indicate  respectively  tho  acquisition  of  wealth, 
ill  health,  acquisition  of  wealth  again,  death,  wealth* 
poverty,  wealth  again,  death  again,  and  sovereign  power. 


20.  Marks  beyond  the  first  30  inches  do  not  signify 
much.  Generally  marks  on  tho  odd  inches  indicate  evil  and 
marks  in  the  even  inches  indicate  good-  According  to 
some,  marks  beyond  the  first  30  inches  do  not  signify 
anything  at  all. 


21.  If  the  sword  should  smell  like  the  leaf  of  the 
plant  Assaf’oetida.,  tho  blue  lotus,  the  juice  of  the  rutting 
elephant,  ghee,  saffron,  the  white  water-lily,  or  the  chain- 
paka,  it  indicates  prosperity  ;  but  if  it  should  smell  like  the 
cow’s  urine,  inire,  or  marrow,  it  indicates  evil. 


22.  If  the  sword  should  smell  like  fchetortoi.se,  serum, 
blood,  or  salt,  it  indicates  fear  and  grief.  If  the  sword 
should  appear  bright  as  viduriya,  gold  or  lightning,  it 
indicates  increased  success  and  health. 


23.  The  following  methods  of  tempering  swords  and 
cutting  instruments  are  taken  from  the  works  of  Sukra  ; 
He  who  desires  bright  prosperity  shall  temper  tho  weapon 
in  blood  ;  be  who  desires  an  excellent  sou  shall  temper  the 
weapon  in  ghee ;  and  he  who  desires  great  wealth  shall 
temper  it  in  water. 


24.  If  the  weapon  be  tempered  in  the  blood  of  tho 
mare,  a  she  camel  or  a  she  elephant,  there  will  be  acquisi¬ 
tion  of  wealth  by  wicked  deeds  ;  if  it  be  tempered  in  the 
fat  of  the  fish,  or  in  the  milk  of  the  deer,  or  of  the  horse, 
or  of  the  goat,  or  in  the  juice  of  the  palm  fruit,  the  weapon 
will  become  so  strong  that  the  trunk  of  the  elepnsnt 
can  be  cut  with  it. 


25>  After  smearing  oil  over  the  weapon  there  shall 
be  smeared  over  it  again  a  preparation  or  mixture  o  f  the 


black  powder  of  the  burnt  horn  of  the  ram,  the  excrement 
<>f  the  turtle  dove  and  of  the  rat,  and.  the  milk  or  juice  of 
the  plant  Calotrapis  gigantoa  (CT®S:?;<.bu/rtw),  the  weapon 
shall  then  be  tempered  in  any  of  the  ways  described.  It 
will  not  break  at  all  when  rubbed  against  the  whetstone, 

20-  Salt  shall  be  dissolved  in  the  juice  of  the  plantain 
and  the  juice  shall  bo  kept  so  for  a  day  ;  if  the  weapon  be 
tempered  in  it  the  next  day,  it  will  not  breuk  when  rubbed 
agi  inst  the  wbotstouo,  and  no  other  metal  can  injure  it 
in  any  way. 


CHAPTER  IV.  (51) 

Anoavjdya. 

1.  It  shall  bo  the  duty  of  an  astrologer  to  examiue 
anti  note  indications  connected  with  the  clik  (direction), 
ethana  (place),  and  ahrita  (anything  carried),  as  well  as 
the  ekeshta  (motion)  connected  with  the  body  of  t-ho  que¬ 
rent  or  of  any  other  person,  and  time.  For  the  All-knowing 
Universal  Intelligence  pervading  nil  movable  and  immova¬ 
ble  objects  indicates  coming  events  by  motions  and  casual 
words  to  devout  souls  who  have  faith  iu  Him. 

2.  That  place  is  known  as  Santa  Sthana  which  is 
shaded  over  by  trees  overgrown  with  fruits  and  flower?, 
inhabited  by  birds  of  fine  glossy  plumage,  unapproached  by 
evil  birds  and  bearing  good  names.  Dwelling  places  of 
the  Dovus,  tho  Rishis,  the  Brahmins,  fcho  Sadbus  and  the 
Sidha-s,  places  rendered  agreeable  by  fragrant  flowers  and 
crops,  and  places  covered  over  with  green  turf,  and  from 
its  purity  and  waters  calculated  to  exhilirate  ono’s  spirit, 
are  also  good  places. 

3.  That  is  not  a  good  place  in  which  aro  found  trees 
cut  or  split,  or  eaten  through  by  worms  or  covered  with 


BRIHAT  SAM  HIT  A, 


m 


horns,  or  bum  cor  of  ugly  appearance, .  or  crooked  or  in¬ 
habited  by  evil  birds,  or  of  bad  names  or  with  most  of  their 
leaves  or  their  bark  dry  or  fallen. 

4.  That  is  not  a  good  place  which  is  either  a  crema¬ 
tion  ground  or  n  deserted  place  of  Tapas  (psychical  train¬ 
ing)  or  any  uneven  ground,  or  ground  with  barren  or 
saline  soil,  or  ground  with  excrement,  charcoal,  pot-3hred, 
ash,  or  dried  grass. 


5.  That  is  not  a  good  place  in  which  is  found  a  per¬ 
son  who  has  abandoned  all  worldly  cares,  or  a  mute  person, 
or  a  barber,  or  an.  enemy,  or  which  nujy  be  a  place  of  de¬ 
tention  or  custody,  or  in  which  may  be  found  batchers, 
chandaUs,  gamblers,  ascetics  or  diseased  persons,  or  which 
may  be  a  place  where  weapons  or  liquor  may  bo  sold. 


6.  The  East,  North  and  North-east  indicate  good 
luck  to  the  querent  ;  the  North-west,  West,  South-west, 
South  and  South-east  do  not  indicate  good  luck.  Fore¬ 
noon  indicates  good  luck,  night,  twilight  hours  and  the 
afternoon  do  not  indicate  good  luck. 


7.  The  various  good  and  bad  indications  described  in 
my  work  on  Yatra  aro  also  applicable  here.  Judgment  on 
queries  shall  bo  pi-ouounced  on  examining  the  things  before 
the  astrologer,  the  things  that  may  be  brought  before  him 
or  that  the  querent  may  have  in  his  hands  or  about  bis 
clothes. 

8.  The  organs  that  point  to  a  male  are  the  thighs, 
lips,  nipples,  testicles,  feet,  teeth,  arms,  hands,  cheek,  hair, 

throat,  nails,  thumb,  arm-pit,  shoulders,  ears,  anu.i  and  the 

% 

genital  organ. 

9.  The  organs  that  point  to  a  female  are  the  brows,  tho 
nose,  the  buttocks,  folds  of  the  belly*  the  hip  and  fiugom 
with  good  lines; 


3 


VvTvv"  .  \;  f  V '■  Ft V,.<r.  WVy-.r,’ :  “f  '  - '  ' ’T,  '  ■  ‘  ■  V '•'■.■*■  • 

BliUIAT  BAMIIITi-  fun. 

0.  Also  the  tongiu ,  the  neck,  the  cal  yea  ol  the  leg, 
fcjie  l* eels,  the  ankles,  tho  navel,  the  sides,  the  heart,  the 
chin,  tin:  eyes,  the  penis,  the  breast,  or  the  lower  part  of 

the  spine 

10.  The  organs  that,  point  to  a  hermaphrodite  are  the 
head  and  forehead-  Face  and  Other  parts  of  the  body 
point  *o  delay  in  effect.  Parts  of  body  that  point  to  a 
hermaphrodite  as  well  as  parts  of  disagreeable  appearance 
or  that  may  be  wounded  or  broken,  do  not  point  to  success 
in  undertaking. 

11.  If  the  big  too  is  either  touched  or  shaken,  it 
indicates  sore  eyes  ;  if  any  other  toe  is  touched  or  shaken, 
there  will  be  grief  on  account  of  one’s  daughter-  If  the 
head  is  struck,  thero  will  bo  fear  from  the  rulers. 

12.  If  tho  breast  is  accidentally  struck,  husbands  and 
wives  will  part  from  each  other-  If  any  torn  or  dirty 
clothes  over  a  person  be  pulled,  there  will  bo  poverty;  if 
while  putting  the  query,  the  querent  should  have  his 
clothes  stuck  to  his  foot,  the  querent  will  gain  his  desired 
object- 

13.  If  lines  bo  drawn  on  the  ground  with  the  big  toe, 
tho  matter  quesited  relates  to  fields  ;  if  the  feel  be  scratched 
by  the  hand,  the  matter  relates  to  a  maid  servant, 

14.  If  palm,  bark-dress  or  clothes  be  seen,  tho  matter 
quesited  relates  to  a  cloth  remaining  in  a  place  whore  hair, 
husk,  boues,  or  ash  is  deposited  ,  if  n  ropo  or  net  be  seen, 
thero  will  be  disease,  and  if  bark-dress  bo  seen,  tho  matter 
relates  to  one's  Idas  smen. 

15.  If  long  pepper,  pepper,  dried  ginger,  varida.,* 
rodra,  kuahtu,  cloth,  water,  cumin  seed,  gaodha-mamsi,f 

*  Varida,  otherwise  known  »s  Cala,  a  kind  of  perfume  or  fragrant 
;  msB,  Anclropogon  SciirenanthtiB. 

t  GaiuUift-uiatujii ;  a  kind  of  Indian  spikenard. 


1» 

1 


FlllI  HAT  SAMHTTA. 


(HU,  or  tagara  bo  seen,  the  il, alter  quesifcod  relates  res¬ 
pectively  to  what  follows  • 


10.  A  woman,  a  man,  an  offender,  an  afflicted  person, 


roads,  son,  wealth,  grain,  son,  a  biped  creature,  a  quadru¬ 
ped  and  the  earth. 

17.  If  the  fruits  of  theNyagrodha,  Madhuka,  Tinduka, 
Jiimbu,  Platcha,  the  Mango,  or  Badari  bo  seen  in  the  hand, 
the  matter  relates  respectively  to  tlio  acquisition  of  wealth, 
to  gold,  man,  metal,  cloth,  silver  or  copper. 

18.  If  a  vessel  full  of  grain  or  water  bo  seen,  there 
will  be  au  increase  of  family.  If  the  excrement  of  an  ele¬ 
phant,  a  cow  or  a  dog  bo  seen,  the  matter  relates  respec-' 
lively  to  stolen  property,  or  girl  or  friends. 

11).  TP  a  cow,  an  elephant,  a  buffaloe,  a  lotus,  silver  or 
tiger  be  soon,  there  will  bo  a  large  acquisition  of  sheep, 
wealth,  dwelling  house,  sandalwood,  white  silk  or  jewels. 

20.  If  at  the  time  of  query,  there  be  seen  an  old  man, 
a  boudha,  ascotic,  ora  Sannyasi,  the  matter  quesited  relates 
to  a  friend,  to  gambling,  to  wealth,  to  a  prostitute,  to  a 
king  or  to  a  woman  just  delivered. 

21.  If  a  boudha,  a  preceptor,  an  arhat,  a  naked 
Sany asi,  any  omen,  a  scientific  work,  or  a  fisherman  be  seen, 
the  matter  relates  to  a  thief,  a  general,  a  merchant,  a  maid 
servant,  a  soldier,  an  article  for  sale,  or  a  person  to  be  killed 

22*  If  a  hermit  be  seen,  the  matter  relates  to  a  person 
who  has  gone  abroad  to  travel ;  if  a  dealer  in  liquor  be  seou, 
the  matter  relates  to  the  protection  of  animals  ;  if  a  person 
be  seen  gathering  grains  in  market  places,  the  matter 
relates  to  some  danger  or  difficulty- 

23.  If  the  querent  be  hoard  to  say,  u  I  like  to  quo  ¬ 
tum/’  the  matter  relate**  to  a  wish  to  on  joy  a  woman  ;  if  ho 
begins  by  stating  “  say,”  the  matter  relates  to  a  family  , 
if  the  expression  bo  “  I  want  to  see,”  the  matter  relates  to 


BK1HAT  UMIin'A.. 


[on.  i 


gain;  if  the  expression  be  “requests  that  orders  may  be 
made,  ’  the  matter  relates  to  wealth. 

24.  If  the  expression  be  “  may  the  information  be 
givon,”  the  matter  relates  to  success;  if  the  expression  bo 

examine  soon  and  discover  my  thoughts,”  the  matter  re- 
J.ites  to  something  connected  with  roads;  if  the  expression 
be  “  what  is  in  the  midst  of  all  people  should  be  soon  exa¬ 
mined,”  the  matter  relates  to  kinsmen  who  have  been 
abducted  away. 

25.  If  the  eheshta  (motion)  refers  to  the  inner  organs, 
the  matter  relates  to  one’s  own  people  ;  :if  to  the  outer  or¬ 
gans,  then,  to  other  people  ;  if  to  the  toos  or  lingers,  then, 


<SL 


to  man  or  a  maid  servant ;  if  to  the  knees,  then,  to  one’s 
servant ;  if  to  the  navel,  then,  to  one’s  younger  sister;  and 
if  to  the  heart,  then,  to  one’s  wife  ;  and  to  the  toes  or  other 
fingers,  then,  to  a  son  or  daughter. 

20.  If  the  cheslita  refers  to  the  belly,  the  query  re¬ 
lates  to  one’s  mother ;  if  to  the  head,  then,  to  one’s  precep¬ 
tor  ;  if  to  the  right  or  left  arm,  then,  respectively,  to  one’s 
brother  or  brother’s  wife. 


27-  If,  after  leaving  the  inner  organs,  the  outer  organs 
be  touched,  or  if  at  tho  time  of  query,  the  querent  drops 
down  any  thing  in  his  hand  while  ejecting  phlegm  or  pass¬ 
ing  urine  or  excrement,  the  matter  quesitod  relates  to  theft- 
28.  If  any  part  of  the  body  be  greatly  bont  and  then 
concealed,  or  if  any  person  be  seen  to  possess  an  empty 
vessel*’  the  matter  relates  to  thieves  ;  if  at  the  time  of  query, 
such  expressions  as  “  carried  away,”  “fallen,”  “  wounded,” 
“  forgotten,”  “  lost,”  “  broken,”  ir  gone”  “  stolen,”  dead,’ 
and  the  like  be  heard,  then,  the  stolen  property  cannot  bo 
recovered. 

20.  If  the  husk  of  grain,  bones  or  poison  bo  seen,  or  it 
moaning  and  sneezing  be  beard,  the  siok  man  will  die  ;  if 
the  wind  should  blow  on  one’s  body  and  then  carry  away 


oiD0  heavy  substauce  from  within  a  room,  judgment  shall 


j'tj 


BRItUT  3AHHI1A. 


21 


be  pronounced  that  a  person  after  eatiug  to  excess  and 
being  over-satiated  has  died. 

30.  If  the  forehead  be  touched  or  barley  be  seen,  then 
Salya  rice  is  indicated ;  if  the  breast  bo  touched,  then  the 
Shashtika  rice  is  indicated  ;  if  the  neck  be  touched,  bailey 
rice  is  indicated, 

31.  If  the  abdomen,  nipples,  belly  or  knees  be  touch¬ 
ed,  the  matter  relates  respectively  to  black-gram,  milk, 
gingelly,  or  barley ;  if  one  is  seen  to  swallow  or  lick  the 
lip,  sweet  flavor  is  indicated. 

32.  If  the  tongue  be  struck  against  the  pallet,  the 
matter  refers  to  an  object  of  desire  ,•  if  one  is  seen  to  make 
a  wry  face,  sour  substance  is  indicated  ;  if  one  is  seen  to 
hiccough,  then  the  substauce  indicated  is  either  pungent, 
bitter  or  astringeut;  if  one  is  seen  to  sputter,  salt  substance 
is  indicated. 

33.  If  one  is  scon  to  spit  phlegm,  a  small  dry  bitter 
substauce  is  indicated  ;  if  the  brow,  the  cheek,  or  the  lip  be 
touched,  the  flesh  of  the  vulture  has  been  eaten. 

34.  If  the  bead,  neck,  hair,  chin,  throat,  ears,  the 
shanks,  the  knees  or  the  lower  belly  be  touched,  judgment 
shall  be  pronounced  that  the  meals  eaten  contained  res¬ 
pectively  the  flesh  of  the  elephant,  buffalo,  sheep,  pig,  cow, 
hare  or  deer. 

35.  If  bad  omens  be  seen  or  hoard,  the  meals  eaten 
contained  the  flesh  of  the  iguana  and  the  fish ;  questions 
connected  with  pregnancy  shall  bo  determined  us  follows  : 

36.  If  the  organs  or  parts  of  body  representing  the 
male,  female  or  hermaphrodite  sex  be  seen,  thought  over 
or  touched,  a  child  of  that  sex  will  be  born  ;  if  any  drink, 
rioo  or  flower  be  seen,  prosperity  is  indicated;  if  the  point 
between  the  brows  or  if  fingers  be  touched  by  the  thumb, 
the  matter  relates  to  pregnancy;  if  honey,  ghee,  gold. 


HRIM'J'  A'iM  IUTA 


[err.  \ 


'rm\a,  corn,  v  and  the  •■  like  be.  touched  or  seen,  or  if  vhe 
mother  or  fell©  nurse  or  the  son  should  be  near,  pregnane? 

is  indicated  t 


08.  If  the  hand  is  seen  in  the  belly,  the  matter  relates 
to  pregnancy  ;  if  bad  omen  should  occur,  the  'matter  does 
not  relate  to  prog  nancy  ;  if  the  belly  be  pulled  or  tlio  seat 
be  disturbed,  or  if  the  bands  be  seen  one  over  the  other, 
the  matter  does  not  relate  to  pregnancy. 

.‘IP.  If  the  right  nostril  be  touched,  the  delivery  will 
occur  after  a  month  ;  if  tho  loft  nostril  bo  touched,  after  two 
mouths ;  not  so  if  the  ears  bo  touched;  bub  after  two 
months,  if  the  light  ear  ho  touched,  find  after  four  months, 
if  the  left  ear  be  touched  ;  also  after  four  months  if  the 
right  nipple  bo  touched,  and  after  eight  months  if  the  left 
nipple  be  touched.  ..  . 

40.  The  root  of  tho  plaited  hair  indicates  3  sons,  the 
oars  indicate  2  daughters,  tho  hands  5  sons,  tho  tip  of  the 
thumb  3  sons,  the  tip  of  tho  big  toe  5  sons,  the  two  heels 
a  daughter. 

41.  If  tho  right  or  left  thigh  be  touched,  a  son  or  a 
daughter  is  indicated;  if  tho  centre  or  end  of  tho  forehead 
be  touched,  4  or  3  sons  will  respectively  be  born. 

42.  The  head,  the  forehead,  tho  brows,  the  ears,  tho 
cheek,  tho  jaw,  tho  teeth,  the  neck,  the  right  shoulder,  tho 
left  shoulder,  tho  hand,  the  chin,  the  wind  pipe, 

43.  The  breast,  the  right  nipple,  the  left  nipple,  tho 
heart,  tho  sides,  the  belly,  the  hip,  tho  buttocks,  the  anus, 
the  genital  organs,  the  two  thighs,  tho  knees,  the  ankles 
and  tho  feet  are  respectively  parts  of  the  body  represented 
by  tho  twenty -seven  asfcerisms  from  Krittika- 

44.  Thus  have  I  described  tiio  several  matters  connect¬ 
ed  with  Angavidya  on  a  full  examination  of  the  treatises 
relat  ing  to  the  subject ;  that  person  who,  possessed  of  a 


% 


JiRIKA'I'  SAMHITA 


wead  intellect  and  of  a  generous  disposition  masters  thin 
branch  of  the  science,  will  bo  respected  by  the  king  ami 


CHAPTER  V.  (52) 

On  Pimples- 

1.  Pimples  breaking  out  in  the  Brahmins,  the  Kahn- 
triyaa,  the  Vysias  and  the  Sad  ran  should  respectively  be 
white,  rod,  yellow  and  black,  in  order,  that  they  may 
produce  the  effects  described  bc-low; 

2.  If  glossy  and  clear  pimples  break  out  in  the  head, 
there  will  bo  acquisition  of  wealth  ;  if  in  tho  crown  of  the 
bead,  there  will  bo  good  fortune  ;  if  in  the  two  ©ye-brows> 
there  will  be  bad  luck  and  the  meeting  of  friends ;  if 
between  tho  eye-brows,  there  will  be  loss  of  character  ;  if 
on  tho  eye-lids,  there  will  be  sorrow  and  tho  gaining  of 
the  desired  object ;  if  in  the  temples,  tho  person  will  turn 
out  a  hermit ;  and  if  on  both  sides  of  the  noso  whore  the 
tears  fall,  there  will  bo  great  anxiety. 

3.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  thoi  nose,  tho  person 
will  got  now  cloth  ;  if  in  tho  cheek, ^he  will  get  a  son  ;  if 
in  the  lips  or  just  below  them,  ho  will  get  good  food  ;  if  in 
the  fore-head  or  in  the  corners  of  tho  mouth,  there  will  bo 
acquisition  of  wealth  ;  if  in  the  throat,  the  person  will 
acquire  ornaments,  food  and  drink  ;  if  in  the  ears,  lie  will 
acquire  a  collection  of  ornament  and  a  knowledge  of  Atina. 

4.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  tho  joint  of  tho  head, 
the  neck,  tho  heart,  the  two  nipples,  the  two  sides,  or  in  the 
breast,  the  person  will  get  respectively  a  blow  with  au 
iron  rod,  a  blow,  a  sou,  a  son  again,  any  gain,  grief,  and 
any  object  of  desire  ;  if  it  breaks  out  in  tho  two  shoulders, 
there  will  bo  much  wandering  for  alms  and  destruction  ; 
and  if  in  tho  two  arm-pits,  the  person  will  acquire  wealth 
and  comfort 


4  BKJUAT  SAMH1TA.  [CH 

5>  If  the  pimple  breaks  cut  in  the  back  there  will  be 
grief  and  nun  ;  if  in  the-  two  upper  arms,  the  enemy  will 
perish  ;  if  in  the  two  wrists,  there  will  be  imprisonment  ; 
if  in  the  two  lower  arms,  there  will  bo  an  acquisition  ot' 
ornaments. 

G.  I  f  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  the  bands,  fingers  or 
belly,  there  will  respectively  be  an  acquisition  of  wealth, 
good  luck  or  grief  $  if  it  breaks  out  in  the  navel,  the  person 
will  get  good  food  and  drink ;  if  just  under  the  navel,  there 
will  be  theft  of  property  by  robbers;  if  in  a  man’s  genital 
organs,  he  will  get  a  young  woman  and  good  sous;  if  in  the 
anus  ;  he  will  acquire  wealth,  and  if  in  the  testicles,  thoro 
will  he  good  fortune. 

7.  If  the  pimple  breaks  out  in  the  thighs,  the  person 
will  get  a  carriage  and  a  woman  ;  if  in  the  knees,  there  will 
bo  injury  from  enemies  ;  if  'in  the  shanks,  there  will  he 
wound  from  weapons  ;  and  if  in  the  ankles,  thero  will  be 
trouble  from  a  journey  on  foot  and  from  imprisonment. 

8.  If  the  pitnple  breaks  out  in  the  buttocks,  heels  dr 
soles  of  the  feet,  there  will  respectively  bo  loss  of  wealth, 
adultery  or  the  troubles  of  a  journey  on  foot ;  if  in  tlio  toes, 
there  will  he  imprisonment ;  and  if  in  the  big  toe  thero  will 
be  presents  from  kinsmen. 

9.  Any  extraordinary  oruptions,  boils  and  pimples 
breaking  out  on  the  right  side,  and  hurts,  occurring  on  the 
left  side  of  males,  indicate  the  acquisition  of  wealth  ;  the 
reverse  is  tho  case  with  females. 

10.  Thus  have  I  stated  tho  effects  of  pimples  breaking 
out  iu  tho  several  parts  of  the  body  from  head  to  foot,  the 
same  effects  apply  to  wounds,  dark  spots,  pustules,  small 
bunches  of  hair  of  crowded  grow  th  and  to  a  whirling  growth 
of  hair- 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


25 


CHAPTER  VI.  (63) 


Ok  House-building. 

t.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  treat  of  the  science  of 
house-building,  which  has  come  down  to  us  from  the  Rishis 
who  obtained  it  from  Brahma,  for  the  pleasure  of  learned 
Jyoutishakasi 

2.  At  one  time,  a  monster  appeared  with  a  body  so 
Vast  as  to  conceal  the  Earth  and  fcho  sky.  The  Devas  then 
caught  hold  of  parts  of  his  body  and  forcibly  laid  him 
down  with  his  face  towards  the  ground. 

3.  'DJie  several  Dovas  now  preside  over  the  several 
parts  of  the  body  hold  by  them-  The  monster  therefore, 
known  as  Vastopi-usha,  represents  in  his  body  all  the  Devas 
by  order  of  Brahma. 

4.  The  king’s  house  shall  be  one  of  five  sorts.  The 
breadth  of  the  superior  house  shall  bo  103  cubits,  and  that 
of  each  of  the  four  inferior  house**  shall  be  8  cubits  less 
than  the  no.it  preceding  one.  The  length  of  each  house 
shall  be  one-quarter  as  much  more  as  its  b«-.adtb. 

5.  The  general’s  house  shall  be  one  of  five  sorts.  The 
breadth  of  the  superior  house  shall  bo  64  cubits, ; nd  that 
of  each  of  the  four  inferior  houses  shall  be  6  cubits  lew, ban 
the  noxt  preceding  one.  The  length  of  each  house  shall 
be  one-sixth  as  much  more  as  its  breadth- 

6.  The  prime-minister’s  house  shall  also  be  one  of  five 
sorts.  The  breadth  of  the  superior  house  shall  be  60  cu¬ 
bits,  and  that  of  each  of  the  four  inferior  houses  shall  be  four 
cubits  less  than  the  next  preceding  one.  The  length  of 
each  bouse  shall  bo  one-eighth  as  much  more  as  its  breadth. 

The  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  rpieens  shall  bo 
one-half  of  the  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  prime-minis¬ 
ter. 

7-  The  first  prince’s  house  shall  also  be  one  of  five 


is  mu  at  BiMtriTi 


Boris.  The  breadth  of  the  superior  house  shall  be  8^  cubit*, 
and  that  of  the  each  of  tbo  four  inferior  houses  shall  be  six 
cubits  loss  than  the  next  preceding  one.  The  length  oi 
ouch  house  shall  be  one-third  as  much  more  as  its  breadth- 


The  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  younger  princes 
shall  be  one-half  of  the  dimensions  of  the  bouses  of  the  first 
prince. 

8.  The  houses  of  the  tributary  prinoes,  of  worthy 
persons  and  of  the  the  king’s  officers,  shall  be  of  the  differ- 
once  of  the  dimensions  of  the  houses  ol  the  kiug  and  prime 
minister-  The  houses  of  the  chamberlain  and  of  tl  j  king’s 
concubines  and  artists  shall  be  of  the  difference  of  die  dimen¬ 
sions  of  the  houses  of  the  king  and  the  iirst  ju-inee. 

9.  Tho  houses  of  the  .superintendent  ot  the  king’s 
household  and  of  tho  comptroller  of  public  accounts  shall 
be  of  the  dimensions  of  tho  king’*  treasury  and  bed-rooms. 
The  houses  of  the  peons  o?  the  superintendents  shall  be  of 
the  difference  of  tho  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  the  first 
prince  and  tho  pr*uio  minister. 

30.  The  houses  of  tho  Court  astrologers,  priests  and 
physicians  shall  bo  one  of  five  sorts — the  superior  one  be- 
,n(r  AC  cubits  broad  and  tho  breadth  of  tho  four  inferior 
jdcs  shall  bo  severally  4  oubits  less  by  turns ;  the  length  shall 
bo  one-sixth  as  much  more  as  the  breadih. 

11.  If  tho  houses  in  all  the  cases  can  be  made  as 
/  high  as  they'  are  broad,  they  will  conduce  to  prosperity.  In 
5  cases  where  a  house  has  an  inner  verandah,  the  length  of  tho 
I  house  shalijbe  twice  its  breadth. 

12.  The  houses  of  the  four  castes  from  the  Brahmins 
downwards  are  a1  so  of  five  sorts — the  breadths  ot  be 
houses  being  82,  28,  24,  20  and  16  cubits.  A  house  less 
than  16  cubits  broad  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  men  of  low 
class. 


G‘]  BRTIUT  SAMHITA.  27 

13.  The  length  of  the  houses  of  Brahmins  shall  bo 
one-tenth  as  much  more  as  the  breadth,  that  of  the  houses 
ot  Kshatryas  shall  be  one*eighth  as  much  more;  that  of 
the  houses  of  the  Vysias  shall  be  one-sixth  as  much  more; 
and  that  of  the  houses  of  the  Sudras  shall  be  one-fourth  as 
much  more. 

I  t.  1  he  dimensions  of  the  treasury  and  bed  rooms 
shall  be  the  difference  of  the  dimensions  of  the  houses  of 
the  king  and  tho  general.  The  dimensions  of  the  houses  of 
those  honored  by  the  king  shall  bo  of  tho  difference  of  the 
dimensions  of  tho  houses  of  the  general  and  the  several 
castes  from  the  Brahmins  downwards. 

15.  The  dimensions  of  the  houses  of  tho  Para3avas 
and  the  like  shall  bo  one  half  of  tho  sum  of  the  dimensions 
of  tho  houses  proscribed  to  their  class.  If  tho  houses 
discribed  above  for  all  classes  bo  of  greater  or  smaller 
domensions  than  what  wo  have  stated,  they  will  produce 
evil. 

Id.  No  dimensions  are  prescribecllfor  tho  houses  of 
the  cows,  tho  A  aua-prasthas,  for  granaries,  for  tho  arsena  , 
for  lire  and  for  sexual  enjoyment.  However  men  learned 
in  house-building  are  opposed  to  tho  breadth  of  these 
exceeding  100  cubits. 

17.  Add  70  to  tho  breadth  (in  cubits)  of  the  house 
of  the  king  or  the  general  and  divide  the  sum  by  14  and 
the  sumo  sum  again  by  35.  The  quotients  will  give  tho 
breadths  of  the  inner  veranda  and  ol  tho  outer  veranda 
in  front  of  tho  house  door  of  the  house  of  tho  king  or  iho 
general. 

18.  In  the  case  of  the  five  sorts  of  houses  of  the  four 
castes  from  tho  Brahmins  downwards,  the  breadth  of  tho 
inner  verandas  shall  respectively  be  4  cubits  7  inches,  4 
cubits  10  inches,  §  cubits  8  inches,  3  cubits  15  inches,  and 
5  cubits  13  inches. 


DltinAT,  SAMI1ITA. 


J^.  The  breadth  of  the  outer  veranda  in  front  of  tho 
house  door  iu  the  case  of  theso  five  houses  shall  respectively 
be  y  cubits  19  inches,  3  cubits  8  inches,  2  cubits  20  inches, 
2  cubits  18  inches,  and  2  cubits  8  inches. 

20.  Tho  breadth  of  the  Veedhi  around  tho  house  shall 
bo  one-third  ol' the  breadth  of  tho  inner  veranda.  If  the 
Veedhi  be  in  front  of  the  house,  such  house  is  known  as 
Soshneesha- 

21.  It  the  Veedhi  be  found  behind  tho  house,  it  is 
known  as  Sayasrayavn ,  n.ud  if  the  Veedhi  be  found  on  a  side 
of  the  house,  such  house  is  known  as  Savashtanilhaniy  and  if 
tho  Veedhi  be  found  all  round  the  house,  the  house  is  known 
as  Susthitam.  Men  learned  in  house-building  speak  favor¬ 
ably  of  every  one  of  these  Veedhia. 

22.  The  height  of  tho  floor  shall  he  one-sixteenth  of 
the  breadth  ox  the  house  plus  4  cubits.  Generally,  the  height 
of  t  he  floor  of  a  house  may  bo  one-twolfth  less  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  ground. 

23.  The  thickness  of  the  walls  shall  bo  ono-sixtoenth 
of  tho  breadth  of  the  house.  The  wall  may  be  built  of  burnt 
bricks  or  of  wood. 

2 1.  In  the  easee  of  tho  houso  of  tho  king  and  general, 
add  to  the  breadth  of  the  house  (in  cubits)  its  eleventh 

part  and  ad  <0  to  the  sum,  the  height  of  the  entrance  shall 
bo  so  many  inches.  The  breadth  of  the  entrance  shall  bo 
one-half  of  the  height. 

25-  In  tho  case  of  the  houses  of  the  four  castes  from 
tho  Brahmins  downwards,  add  one-fifth  of  the  breadth  of 
the  house  to  18  inches;  nin. -eighths  of  this  sum  is  the 
breadth  of  the  entrance.  Double  the  breadth  of  the  entrance 
is  its  height. 

2t*.  I  he  breadth  of  tho  two  vertical  frames  shall  be 
as  many  inches  as  the  number  of  cubits  in  the  height  of  the 


BKIFAT  SAMHITA. 


entrance.  The  brand th  of  the  bottom  and  top  frames  shall 
be  half  as  much  more  as  the  breadth  of  the  side  frames. 

27.  Multiply  the  height  by7  ;  one  eightieth  of  the 
product  shall  be  the  thickness  of  each  frame.  Multiply  the 
height  of  the  house  by  9;  one  eightieth  of  the  product 
shall  be  the  diameter  of  the  pillar  at  the  bottom.  Nine- 
tenths  of  this  shall  be  the  diameter  of  the  pillar  at  the  top. 

28.  A  four-sided  pillar  or  column  is  known  as  HuchaJca . 
An  eight  sided  pillar  is  known  as  Vajra.  An  eighteen  sided 
pillar  is  known  as  Dvitajra,  and  a  thirty-two  Hided  one  is 
known  as  PralinctTca.  A  pillar  that  is  round  in  the  middle 
is  known  as  Vriita. 

29.  Divide  the  height  of  the  pillar  into  equal  parts. 
The  parts  are  known  as  Vahuna,  Ghata,  Pa dma}Uttaroisht  a, 
and  so  on,  the  names  returning  again. 

80.  The  thickness  of  the  heavy  beams  of  the  sloping 
roof  shall  be  that  of  tbo  pillars.  The  other  beams  higher 

up  the  roof  shall  be  euoh  three-fourths  as  thick  as  tho 
beam  next  below  it. 

81.  The  house  of  the  King  or  Dev.a  which  is  surround¬ 
ed  by  outer  verandas  on  all  the  four  sides,  and  with  an 
entrance  on  each  side,  is  known  as  Sarvato-bkadra. 

32.  Tho  house  which  is  surrounded  by  four  distinct 
outer  verandas  and  with  an  entrance  on  oach  side  except 
on  the  west.,  is  known  as  Nandyavarta* 

33-  The  house  which  has  two  outer  verandas  commen¬ 
cing  at  tho  entrance  with  an  external  veranda  on  the 
southern  side  and  one  on  tho  western  side  and  with  an  en¬ 
trance  on  the  southern  iside,  is  known  as  Vardhamana. 

34.  The  house  which  has  an  outer  veranda  on  the 
eastern  side,  two  parallel  outer  verandas  on  the  southern 
side,  and  ending  in  the  cast  writh  a  separate  one  on  the 


Blllil AT  flAMHITA. 


[CH. 


northern  side  and  with  an  entrance  on  the  eastern  side,  is 
known  as  Swastika. 

So.  The  house  which  has  distinct  outer  verandas  on 
each  side  with  an  entrance  on  each  side  except  the  northern 
side,  is  known  as  Buehaka. 

36.  The  Nandyavarata  and  Vardhamana  houses  aro 
tho  best ;  the  Swastika  and  Ruchaka  houses  are  of  middle 
importance,  and  the  remaining  house  known  as  Sarvato- 
hhadra,  is  best  fitted  tor  kings  to  live  in. 


37.  Tho  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  all  ex¬ 
cepting  the  northern  side,  is  known  as  Hiranya  nabha .  It 
brings  on  wealth.  The  house  which  lias  inner  voi  andas  on 
all  excepting  the  eastern  side,  is  known  as  Sukshetra .  It 
brings  on  prosperity. 


38.  The  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  all  ex¬ 
cepting  the  southern  side,  is  known  as  Ghidlu  It  destroys 
wealth.  The  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  all  ex¬ 


cepting  the  western  side,  is  known  as  Pakshaghva.  It 
brings  on  the  death  of  the  sons  and  produces  enmity. 

30,  1  he  house  w hich  has  inner  verandas  on  the  western 
and  southern  sides  is  known  as  Siddarta,  aud  tho  house 
which  has  inner  verandas  on  the  western  and  northern  sides 


is  known  as  Yamasurya  ;  that  which  has  inner  verandas  on 
the  eastern  and  northern  sides  is  known  as  Danda,  and  that 
which  has  such  verauaas  on  the  eastern  and  southern  sides, 
is  known  as  Vata. 


40.  The  house  which  has  inner  verandas  on  the  eastern 
and  western  sides  is  known  as  GrahachnlU ,  and  that  which 
has  such  verandas  on  the  northern  and  southern  sides  is 
known  as  Kacha ,  The  Siddarta  house  will  bring  on  wealth 
and  the  Yamasurya  house  will  bring  on  the  death  of  the 
master. 


41 .  The  Danda  house  will  bring  on  death  by  a  danda 
or  a  club ;  the  Vatu  house  will  bring  ou  fears  and  disturb- 


B BIHAT  PAMUITA- 


ance ;  tie  Obtlli  house  will  destroy  wealth,  and  the  Kucha 
house  will  bring  on  the  enmity  of  kinsmen. 

42.  Divide  the  house  ground  into  81  squares  by  10 
lines  drawn  from  east  fro  west  and  10  lines  drawn  from 
north  to  south.  32  Dev  as  occupy  the  32  exterior  squares 
and  13  Devas  occupy  the  inner  squares  (as  follows) ; 


43.  Squares  mavked  1,  S,  81  and  73  ore  respective"? 

the  north-eastern,  south-eastern,  north-western  and  south¬ 
western  corners.  The  eight  eastern  squares  from  1  to  8  are 
respectively  occupied  by  the  Devas  Agni,  Parjauya,  Jay  an- 
ta,  Jndra,  Surya,  Satya,' Bhrisa,  and  Antariksho  ^ 

44  &4f>.  The  eight  southern  squares  9,  18,  27,  30,  4n, 
54,  63  and  72  are  respectively  occupied  by  Voyu.  Poosha, 
Vitalii  a.  Bribatkshata,  Yama,  Gandharva,  Bbringarnja  and 
Mriga.  The  eight  western  squares,  81,  80,  79>  73,  77,  /o, 
75  and  74  are  respectively  occupied  by  Pitvi  liouvarii's, 
Sugriva,  Kusumadunta,  Yanina,  A.mra,  Sosha  and  Papa- 


yakshmn,  and  fclio  8  northern  squares,  73,  64,  55,  4G,  37,  28, 
19  and  10  are  respectively  occupied  by  the  Devas  Roga, 
Ahi,  Mukhya,  Bhallata,  Soma  Bhnjaga,  Adibi,  and  Diti.  C3 

4G&47.  Tho  nine  central  squares  3l,  33,  33,  40,41 
42,  49,  50  and  51  are  occupied  by  Brahma.  The  square  23,  duo 
east  of  Brahma  is  occupied  by  Ary  am  a  From  Aryaraa,  the 
alternate  squares  allround  Brahma  from  loft  to  right,  viz., 

25.43.61.59,  57  89  and  21  are  respectively  occupied  by 
Savita,  Vivasvan,  Indra,  Mitra,  Rajayakshrna,  Pribhvidhara 
and  Apavatsa. 

48.  The  inner  north-eastern  square  11,  is  occupied  by 
Apa;  the  inner  south-eastern  square  17  is  occupied  by 
►Savina ;  the  inner  south-western  square,  7 J,  is  occupied 
by  Jay  a,  and  the  inner  north-western  square,  65,  is  occupied 
by  Rudra. 

49.  The  group  of  five  Devas  occupying  the  north¬ 
eastern  portion  of  the  house-ground,  (squares  1,2,  10,  11 
and  21),  viz.,  Agni,  Parjanya,  Diti,  Apa  and  Apavntsa  and 
similar  groups,  each  of  five  Devas,  occupying  the  south¬ 
eastern,  south-western  and  north-western  portions  of  the 
house-ground,  are  known  as  Padikas. 

50-  The  remaining  20  Devas  occupying  tho  other 
squares  aro  known  as  Dwipadaa.  The  Devas  occupying  tho 
duo  eastern,  southern,  western  and  northern  squares — 23, 

43. 59,  33 — viz.,  Aryama,  Vivasvan,  Mitra  and  Pritividhara 
are  known  as  Tripadas. 

51.  The  Vastu-purusha  (house  demon)  lies  with  his 
face  turned  towards  the  ground  and  head  in  the  north¬ 
east.  Agni  holds  Ins  head,  Apa  his  face,  Aryama  liis 
right  nipple  and  Apavatsa  his  breast. 

52.  The  Devas  from  Parjanya  to  Surya  occupying  the 
outer  squares  bold  respectively  the  right  eye,  ear,  breast, 
and  shoulder  ;  the  five  Devas  from  Satya  hold  the  right 
arm  ;  Savita and  Savitra  hold  the  right  hand;  Yitatha  and 
Brikatkshata  hold  the  right  side. 

53.  Vivaswan  bolds  the  belly;  the  four  Devas  from 
Yama  hold  the  right  thigh,  kuee,  shank  and  buttock. 

54.  These  Devas  hold  the  right  limbs  of  the  Vastii 
purusho.  Similarly  tho  other  devas  hold  the  left  limbs.  In¬ 
dra  and  Java  hold  his  penis;  Brahma  his  heart  and  tho 
Pitri  Devas  his  feet. 

53  &  56.  Or,  divide  the  house  ground  into  sixty-four 
equal  squares  ;  draw  the  main  diagonal  lines.  The  four  ceil- 


BROIAT  SAMHXTA. 


33 


fvul  squares  marked  28,  29,  30,  37,  arc  occupied  by  Brahma. 
The  four  squares  occupying  the  inner  corners,  viz.,  19,  2  1,  40, 
and  43,  a;  well  aa  the  four  squares  occupying  the  outer  cor¬ 
ners,  viz.,  1,  8,  64  and  57,  are  divided  enchpiato  two  halves, 
The  other  Squares  all  round  Brahma,  viz.,  20,  21,  30.  38, 
45,  4 }.,  35  and  27,  and  the  other  outer  squn  roS,  viz.,  2  to  7,  16 
to  56,  Go  to  58  and  49  to  9,  are  twenty-four.  The  number 
of  all  the  squares  thus  mentioned  is  44,  and  the  remain¬ 
ing  20  squares,  viz.,  those  forming  the  lour  outermost 
lines  but  one,  aro  known  aa  Dvipadas. 


57.  Tho  cutting  points  of  the  diagonal  lines  as  well 
as  the  exact  centres  of  the  several  squares,  aro  kuown  as 
Marmasthalas — vital  parts-  'I  hose  parts  shall  not  bo  mo¬ 
lested  by  the  erection  of  pillars  ovox”  them  or  in  any  other 

n 

way.  * 


34 


JBRIHAT  SAMH1XA- 


[CH.  6. 

58.  I  i:  these  vital  parts  are  defiled  or  molested  by  im¬ 
pure  substances,  pot-shreds,  peg’s  or  pillars  and  by  Salyas 
(substance  lying  underground),  the  master  of  the  house  will 
suffer  in  those  parts  of  his  body  which  correspond  to  the 
parts  thus  tormented. 

59.  That  portion  of  the  house  ground  contains  Sa.lya 
which  corresponds  to  the  part  of  body  scratched  by  t«he 
master  of  the  house  (at  the  time  of  his  first  entry)  or  where 
bad  omens  or  portents  connected  with  fire  occur  at  the 
time  of  the  boma  ceremony. 

00.  If  the  Salya  bo  wood,  tliero  will  be  destruction  of 
wealth  ;  if  bones,  animals  will  suffer,  and  there  will  bo  much 
suffering  from  diseases  ;  if  metals,  there  will  bo  injury 
from  weapons  ,*  and  if  skulls  or  hair,  there  will  bo  death. 

61.  If  tho  Sidya  be  charcoal,  there  will  bo  fear  of 
robbery  ;  if  ashes,  there  will  al  ways  be  fear  from  destructive 
fires  ;  if  it  be  any  substance  other  than  gold  or  silver  lying 
buried  at  the  Marmusthahr,  there  will  be  great  fears. 

62.  If  the  Salya  be  the  liusk  of  paddy  lying  either  at 
the  Mannas thala  or  at  other  places,  there  will  bo  acquisition 
of  wealth  ;  if  it  be  the  teeth  of  snake  lying  at  the  Marma- 
sfchala,  there  will  be  misery. 

63.  The  diagonal  line,  from  the  Itoga  Beva  (73)  to 
Yayn  Beva  (9)  is  known  as  a  Vatnsa-  The  diagonal  line  from 
Bitri  Beya  (81)  to  Agui  Dova  (1)  is  another  Vamsa.  A 
lino  drawn  from  Vitatha  Beva  (27)  to  Soslva  Beva  (75)  is 
also  a  l  ams®,  arid  that  drawn  from  Mukkya  Beva  (55)  to 
Bmisu  Beva  (7)  is  another  Vamsa.  A  line  drawn  from. 
Jay  an  ta  Beva  (3)  to  Bhringa  Baja  (63)  is  also  a  Vamsa, 
and  a  line  drawn  from  Aditi  (19)  to  Sugriva  (79 J  is  another 
Vamsa- 

64.  Tho  six  lines  cut  one  another  in  nine  points. 
Those  points  are  known  as  Atimarma  places.  The  area  of 
a  Marmasthaln  is  equal  to  ono-cighth  of  the  area  of  a  square. 


'V: 

BRIHAT  SAMHJlA.  35 

05.  The  breadth  of  a  Vamsa  lino  is  as  many  inches 
as  the  length  of  a  side  of  a  square  is  in  yards,  and  Uto 
length  of  a  Sira  is  one  and  a  half  times  the  breadth  of  the 
Vamsa  line. 

66.  If  the  master  of  the  house  desire  prosperity,  ho 
shall  take  particular  care  of  the  portion  of  the  house  which 
is  the  seat  of  Brahma.  If  this  portion  bo  defiled  by  im¬ 
purities,  the  master  of  the  house  will  suffer  miseries. 

67.  If  tho  right  arm  of  the  Vastu-purusha  be  wanting, 
there  will  bo  loss  of  wealth  and  women  will  lose  their 
character  ,-  if-  the  left  arm  bo  wanting,  there  will  be  loss  of 
wealth  and  grain  ;  if  the  head  bo  wanting,  every  virtue 
will  quit  the  house  hold. 

68.  If  any  of  the  Senses  of  the  Yasfcu-pnmsha  should 
suffer  injuries,  women  will  lose  their  character,  sons  will 
perish,  and  the  master  of  the  house  will  become  a  slave 
under  another.  If  the  Vastu-purusha  does  not  suffer  in  any 
way,  the  dwellers  of  the  house  will  gob  honor,  wealth  and 
comfort. 

69.  The  Devas  occupy  their  several  places  as  above 
enumerated  not  ordy  in  houses  but  in  towns  and  villages. 
The  Brahmins  and  other  castes  shall  live  in  places  appro¬ 
priate  to  them. 

70.  The  Brahmins  and  other  castes  shall  dwell  res¬ 
pectively  on  tho  northern,  eastern,  southern  and  western 
sides. 

71.  Either  in  tho  division  of  the  house  ground  into 
81  squares  or  in  that  into  64  squares,  tho  effects  of  having 
the  main-entrance  in  spots  occupied  by  Agni  and  the  other 
Devas  are  as  follow  '• 

72.  If  tho  entranoe  is  opened  in  any  of  the  8  eastern 
squares  beginning  from  tho  north-eastern  corner,  the  effects 
will  respectively  bo  injury  from  fire,  birth  of  daughters, 


K.  6.J 


gain  of  immense  wealth,  the  friendship  of  the  king,  increase 
of  anger,  the  vice  of  lie,  that  of  cruelty  anti  that  of  tlieft. 


73.  I  f  the  entrance  is  opened  in  any  of  the  S  southern 
ttqaares  beginning  from  the  south-eastern  corner,  the  effects 
will  respectively  be  few  sons,  servitude,  becoming  a  chan- 
daln,  oxuesfiive  eating  und  drinking  with  an  increase  of  sous, 
ahg’Qr,  ingratitude,  poverty  and  the  loss  of  sons  and  of 
valor. 

74.  If  the  gate  is  opened  in  any  of  the  8  western 
squun  s  beginning  from  the  south-western  corner,  the  effects 
will  respectively  ho  suffering  of  sons,  the  increase  of  the 
enemy,  the  want  of  wealth  and  sons,  the  increase  of  sons, 
0»‘:  wealth  and  of  strength,  opulence,  fear  from  kings,  loss  of 
wealth, and  disease. 

75'  If  the  gato  is  opened  in  any  of  the  S  northern 
squares  beginning  iVora  the  north-western  corner,  the  effects 
will  respectively  be  increase  of  cruelty  aud  kinsmen,  iucreaso 
of  the  enemy,  gain  of  wealth  and  sous,  the  possession  of  all 
virtues,  the  acquisition  of  sons  and  wealth,  hatred  of  sous, 
the  loss  of  character  of  women  and  tho  loss  of  wealth. 

70.  There  will  bo  misery  if,  opposite  to  the  gate, 
there  be  roads,  trees,  street  corners,  wells,  pillars  or  gutters. 
J1  those  should  be  beyond  a  distance  of  double  the  height 
of  the  house,  they  will  produce  no  harm. 

77.  If  the  obstruction  be  a  car  running  street,  the 
master  of  tho  house  will  die  >  if  it  boa  tree,  tho  son  will 
suffer  ,•  if  it  be  a  permanent  mire,  there  will  be  grief;  if  it 
bo  any  gutter  or  passage  for  water,  there  will  bo  waste. 

.73,  If  tho  obstruction  bo  a  well,  there  will  be  an  attack 

ov  epilepsy  ;  if  it  be  the.  image  of  some  Deva,  there  will  be 

death  ;  if  it  be  n  pillar,  women  will  lose  their  chastity  ;  if  the 

gate  b  opposite  to  the  squares  of  Brahma,  the  family  will 
perish. 


UimtAT  SAMHlTA. 


rm 


CfflC.  6.]  BKHIAT  SABHUTA. 

If  the  door  should  open  of  fly  elf,  there  would  bo 


an  attack  of  mad  nosy  ;  if  it  should  close  of  itself,  the  family 
would  perish  ;  if  the  gate  should  exceed  its  stated  dimen* 


sions,  there  would  be  fear  f  rom  kings  and  robbers  ;  and  if 
the  gate  bo  in  a  low  ground,  there  will  be  grief. 


80.  Gato  over  a  gate  and  n  gate  which  it  is  difficult 
to  enter  will  not  conduce  to  prosperity  ;  an  entrance  which 
is  not  closed  will  produce  suffering  from  hunger;  an  en¬ 
trance  which  is  cither  very  short  or  bent  will  bring  about 
the  ruin  of  the  family. 

SI.  A  troublesome  entrance  will  bring  on  troubles. 
One  that  is  bent  inside  will  bring  on  destruction  ;  one  that 
*s  benfc  outsidp,  will  bring  on  travels  to  foreign  land  ;  and  one 
that  is  not  iu  the  proper  spot,  will  bring*  on  theft  by 
robbers. 


82.  The  front  entrance  shall  not  bo  ol  the  size  of  the 
inner  entrance  ;  such  front  entrance  shall  bo  constructed 
after  due  ceremonies  with  water-pots,  fruits,  flowers  and 
With  curdled  milk. 


81.  The  four  corners  of  the  bouse  beginning  from  the 
north-eastern  point,  are  occupied  respectively  by  four  Deva 
a- omen  known  as  Charaki,  Vidari,  Putana  and  Pakulas*. 

34.  Those  that  live  in  the  corners  of  houses,  villages 
and  towns  will  suffer  miseries.  Persons  subsisting  on  the 
tlosh  of  dogs  and  the  chandalas,  will  become  prosperous  by 
living  in  such  comers. 

So.  The  Laksha  (nr.),  the  Banyan,  the  Udurnbara  (b)  and 
tim  Aswattha  will  bring  on  miseries  if  situated  on  the  south, 
west,  north  and  east  sides  of  the  house,  and  they  will  bring 
on  prosperity  if  they  be  respectively  situated  io  the  north, 
east,  south,  and  west  side  of  the  house. 


(a)  l.aVsta  :  ffaus  virans  Quarto, 

(f>)  Udmubam  !  1ml ian  Fiy  tree.  mini. 


8 


BRIHA'f  SAMEiTA. 


S6.  If  thorny  trees  grow  near  houses,  there  will  be 
foar  from  enemies  ;  if  milky  trees,  there  will  be  waste  of 
wealth  ;  if  fruit  trees,  the  children  will  die.  The  wood  of 
these  trees  shall  also  be  rejected. 

87.  If  it  be  felt  inconvenient  to  remove  the  several  trees 
mentioned  above,  a  number  of  superior  trees  shall  be 
grown  between  them.  These  are  Punnaga  (cP,  Asoka  [p)3 
Arisbta  (c)}  'V'akula  (d),  Paunsa  (a),  Sami  if)  and  Sala  (</.) 

88.  Any  spot  whore  the  ground  is  smooth  and  with¬ 
out  holes,  where  the  earth  is  sweet,  fragrant  and  of  bright, 
appearance  and  where  there  grow  superior  crops,  trees  and 
creepers  is  calculated  to  afford  Comfort  to  the  weary  travel¬ 
ler,  and  if  a  house  is  permanently  built  in  such  a  spot,  how 
happy  should  the  dwellers  feel. 

89-  If  the  house  of  tho  minister  be  near,  there  would 
bo  loss  of  wealth.  If  tho  house  of  a  cheat  be  near,  sons 
will  die  ;  if  a  temple  be  near,  there  will  be  various  fears, 
and  if  four  roads  meet  in  tho  .neighbourhood,  tjho  house 
will  bear  an  evil  reputation. 

90.  If  a  Boudha  temple  should  be  near,  there  would 
be  fear  from  evil  spirits;  if  ant-bills  with  numerous  holes 
be  near,  there  will  be  danger  ;  if  any  low  ground  or  ditch 
bo  near,  there  will  be  suffering  from  thirst;  and  if  a 
tortoise  dwell  near  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth. 

91.  If  the  northern,  eastern,  southern  or  western 
side  be  low,  the  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  the  Lysias  or 
the  Sudras  will  suffor  respectively.  The  Brahmins  may 
live  in  all  places ;  but  the  other  castes  shall  live  in  their 
appropriate  places. 

a ,  l,f}and  g  ;  Those  terms  ore  explained  in  pages  141  to  143 
of  Part  I. 

(<?}*  Arishta  :  The  soap-berry  tree. 

(it).  Yakula  :  The  tree  Mimusops  Elengi. 

(c).  Panaaa  ;  The  Jack  tree.  iStsx/fn&jrJ)* 


BTilHAT  BAM  HIT  A. 


39 


6-] 


92.  Iu  the  centre  of’ the  house-sib©  dig  a  pit  a  cubit 
dcep;  (broad  ami  long)  and  fill  it.  with  tho  earth  taken  from 
it ;  if  tho  earth  is  found  too  little,  there  will  bo  misery  ;if  ifc 


he  found  just  enough,  the  site  is  one  of  middle  importance, 
and  if  it  he  found  too  much,  there  will  be  increase  of  wealth. 

93.  Or  fill  the  pit  with  water  and  walk  100  feet  from 
it  If,  on  returning,  the  water  bo  found  not  to  have  fallen, 
there  will  be  an  increase  of  wealth  ;  or  if  tho  quantity  bo 
an  adhaka  of  64  phallus,  there  will  bo  an  increase  of  wealth. 

94.  Or  place  an  unburnt  earthen  vessel  in  the  pit ; 
and  in  it  burn  a  wick.  The  ground  will  be  fit  for  the  use 
of  that  class  of  moo  in  whose  direction  the  flame  is  seen  to 
be  inclined. 

95.  The  ground  will  also  bo  fit  for  the  use  of  that 
class  of  men  the  flower  of  whose  appropriate  color  is  found 
neither  to  fade  nor  lose  its  hue  when  thrown  in  a  pit  in  tho 
ground-  Generally  a  ground  is  fit  to  live  in,  if  a  person 
has  a  special  liking  for  it- 

96.  If  the  ground  bo  white,  red,  yellow  or  black,  or  if 
it  bo  found  to  smell  like  ghee,  blood,  cooked  rice  or  liquor, 
the  Brahmins,  the  ICshatryas,  the  Yysyas  or  the  Sudraa 
will  respectively  prosper. 

97.  If  the  ground  bo  over-grown  with  knsa  grass, 
para  or  wild  reeds,  the  dttrva  grass,  or  reods,  or  if  its  flavor 
be  found  to  be  sweet,  astringent,  sour  or  pungent,  the 
Brahmins,  the  Kshatry as,  the  Yysyas  or  the  Sudras  will  res¬ 
pectively  prosper. 

98.  The  house  ground  shall  first  be  either  ploughed 
or  grown  with  tho  sprouts  of  seed  grains  or  dwelt  by  cows 
or  by  Brahmins.  The  person  who  desires  to  build  a  house 
in  it  shall  in  an  auspicious  hour,  as  ascertained  by  an 
Astrologer,  enter  it  and  commence  building  work. 

99.  He  shall  then  perform  puja  to  the  Devas  with 
various  cakes,  curdled  milk,  colored  rice,  sandal  paste, 


flower’s  and  perfumed  smoke  i  aud  shall  also  shew  duo 
honor  to  Brahmins  and  to  the  builders  and  shall  satisfy 
them  with  presents. 


100.  The  Brahmins,  the  Kshatrias,  the  Vy-iyas  and 
the  Sudras  shall  respectively  touch  their  foreheads, 
breasts,  thighs  aud  feet  and  draw  lines  marking  the  site  of 
the  house  to  ho  built. 

10b  The  person  (the  master  of  the  house)  taking  i  n 
his  hand  gold,  gems,  silver,  pearls,  curdled  milk,  fruits, 
flowers  or  colored  rice,  shall  draw  tiro  lino  with  his 
thumb,  tho  middle  finguer  or  the  fore-finger- 

102.  If  the  lino  bo  drawn  with  a  weapon,  there  will 
be  death  by  weapons.  If  it  be  drawn  with  a  piece  of  metal 
there  will  bo  imprisonment.  If  with  ashes,  there  will  bo  fear 
from  destructive  fires;  if  with  a  pioee  of  straw,  there  will 
bo  fear  from  robbers  ;  and  if  with  a  pieco  of  wood,  there 
will  be  fear  from  kings. 

103.  If  tho  lino  bo  drawn  with  the  foot  or  be  indis¬ 
tinct  and  not  straight  there,  will  be  Ibar  from  weapons  and 
from  grief.  If  it  be  drawn  with  a  piece  of  leather,  with 
charcoal,  bone  or  booth,  the  master  of  the  house  will  sutler 
miseries. 

101.  If  tho  lino  be  drawn  from  right  to  left,  there 
will  bo  enmity  ;  and  if  from  left  to  right,  there  will  be  pros¬ 
perity.  If  at  tho  time  of  drawing  the  line,  cruel  words 
are  hoard,  or  if  anybody  bo  seen  to  spit  or  to  sneeze,  there 
will  bo  misery. 

105,  Tho  builder  shall  enter  the  bouse  either  halt 
built  or  wholly  built,  aud  shall  carefully  observe  where  tho 
master  of  the  house  stands  and  what  parts  ot  his  body  lie 
touches. 

10G.  If  at  the  time  birds  bo  seen  to  sound  disagree¬ 
ably,  facing  tho  Sun,  there  will  be  bone  corresponding  to 


CH-  $.] 


BlJIHAT  SAMITITA 


Sl 


that  of  'ho  part  of  body; touched,  lying  buried  at  tho  spat, 
where  tho  master  of  the  house  stands. 

]07-  Or  if,  at  the  time,  an  elephant,  a  horse,  a  dog 
or  the  like  be  heard  to  sound,  then  the  bones  of  these  ani¬ 
mals  corresponding  to  that  of  the  part  of  body  touched  by 
the  master  of  the  house,  will  be  found  buried  at  the  spot. 

108-  If,  when  the  rope  is  tied  up,  the  nss  is  heard 
to  cry,  bone  lies  buried ;  and  tho  same  thing  may  be  declar¬ 
ed  in  case  the  rope  is  crossed  over  by  a  dog  or  a  jackal. 

109.  If  birds  are  seen  to  sing  melodiously,  facing 
the  quarter  opposite  to  the  Sun,  there  is  treasure  under¬ 
ground  either  at  tho  spot  where  tho  master  of  the  house 
stands  or  in  that,  part  of  Vastu-purusha’a  body,  which  cor¬ 
responds  to  the  part  of  body,  touched  by  the  master  of  tho 
house* 

110.  If  the  rope  should  break  there  would  be  death  ; 
if  the  peg  should  come  out  or  be  found  turned  upside  down, 
there  would  be  severe  disease  ,*  and  if  the  master  of  the 
house  or  the  builders  should  forget  to  take  with  them  arty 
necessary  substance  or  article,  there  would  also  bo  death. 

111.  If  tho  water  pot  should  slip  down  the  shoulder, 
there  would  be  head-ache.  If  the  water  should  run  out, 
the  family  would  suffer,*  if  the  pot  should  be  broken,  the 
servants  would  die,*  and  if  it  slip  down  fromwthe  band,  tho 
master  of  the  house  would  die. 

112.  After  finishing  the  pooja,  the  first  foundation 
stono  shall  bo  laid  on  the  north-eastern  corner,  and  then,  all 
round  from  left  to  right,  the  other  stones  shall  be  laid.  Tho 
pillars  shall  also  be  erected,  iu  the  same  order. 

118*  The  ceremony  of  erecting  the  tall  pillars  of  tho 
entrance  shall  be  performed  carefully  with  umbrellas,  flower 
wreaths,  cloth,  pertained  smoke  and  sandal. 


6 


BRHJAT  SAMiriTA-  [CHt  Q, 

114.  Thu  same  good  effects  shall  bo  predicted  from 
tho  entry  of  birds  into  holes,  the  shaking  of  their  wings, 
their  fall  and  flight  as  in  the  case  of  the  Indra  Dhwaja. 

ilo.  If  the  north-eastern  corner  be  of  a  higher  level 
1'AftB  the  rest;  there  will  bo  loss  of  wealth  and  sons  ;  if  the 
ground  omit  bad  smell,  sons  will  die  ;  if  the  ground  be 
of  irregular  shape,  kinsmen  will  die  ;  if  the  sides  are  irre¬ 
gular,  there  will  be  no  pregnancy. 

Ut>.  He  that  desires  prosperity  shall  raise  the  house- 
ground  equally  on  all  aides.  If  any  portion  of  the  ground 
be  of  a  higher  level  than  the  rest,  there  will  be  misery.  If 
nn  x  voidable,  the  eastern  or  northern  side  may  be  of  a  slight¬ 
ly  higher  level. 

117.  If  the  eastern  side  be  of  a  higher  level,  there 
will  r  j  hatred  of  friends,*  if  the  southern  side,  there  will 
lo  deaths  in  the  family ;  if  the  western  side,  there  will  be 
loss  of  wealth  ;  and  if  the  northern  side,  there  will  be  grief. 

113.  The  apartment  for  the  Dovas  shall  be  built  in 
the  north-east;  the  kitohen  in  the  south-east;  the  room  for 
the  household  utensils  shall  be  erected  in  the  south-west; 
and  the  treasury  and  the  granary  rooms  shall  be  erected  in 
the  north-west. 

lid.  If  there  be  any  piece  of  water  in  the  east,  south¬ 
east,  south,  south-west,  west,  north-west,  north  and  north¬ 
east,  there  will  respectively  be  the  death  of  sons,  injury 
lrom  tire,  troubles  from  enemies,  quarrels  among  women, 
unohastity  among  women,  poverty,  increase  of  wealth  and 
increase  of  sons, 

120.  For  the  purpose  of  house-building  other  trees 
shall  bo  cut  down  than  those  in  which  birds  reside,  or  that 
are  broken  or  have  dried  or  are  burnt,  or  in  which  the 
Dovas  live  or  which  grow  on  cremation  grounds,  as  well  as 
milky  trees,  the  dhava,  the  vibhiiaka \>  the  viargosa  and  the 
a  raw. 


Dill  HAT  SAMHITA, 


w  ~ 

12 1.  Cooked  rice  shall  bo  offered  and  pnja  per  formed 
to  the  tree  at  night,  and  it.  shall  be  cut  down  from  left  to 
right  next  day.  If  it  falls  on  the  north  or  east  side,  there 
will  bo  increase  of  wealth,  and  if  it  falls  on  any  other  side, 
it  shall  be  rejected. 

122.  If  the  cut  bo  not  irregular,  the  tree  will  bring 
on  prosperity;  if  the  portion  cut  be  of  yellow  color,  thoro 
will  be  an  iguana  inside  the  tree. 

123.  If  the  color  bo  bright-red,  there  will  bo  a  frog 
within  ;  if  black,  >  cobra ;  if  red,  a  blood-sucker;  if  of  the 
color  of  kidney  bean,  there  will  bo  a  stono  within ;  if  brown, 
there  will  be  amt,  and  if  of  the  color  of  the  sword,  thcro 
will  be  water  within. 

1 24.  Ho  that  desires  prosperity  shall  not  sleep  on  a 
higher  level  than  that  of  grain,  cows,  preceptor,  fire,  and 
the  Devas  ;  nor  shall  ho  sleep  under  a  beam,  nor  with  his 
head  towards  the  north  or  west,  nor  naked  nor  with  wet 
feet- 

125.  After  due  puja  to  the  Devas  with  perfumed 
smoke,  sandal  paste  and  various  articles  of  food,  the  house 
shall  be  entered  with  a  largo  quantity  of  flowers,  with  fes¬ 
toons  and  water  pots,  the  Jirahmins  chanting  vedio 
hymns. 

CHAPTER  YII  (51) 

On  Undeb-cuekents, 

1.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  treat  of  the  science  of 
under-currents  by  which  man  may  get  at  water  and  observe 
the  duties  of  life  and  bo  happy.  Justt  in  the  same  way  as 
there  are  arterie.  for  the  circulation  of  blood  in  human 
bodies,  there  are  water  courses  running  in  all  directions 
above  and  below  within  the  Earth- 


0  0*8^1 


2,  Water  th.it  calls  from  the  olouda  is  of  one  color  and 
one  flavor;  after  contact  with  the  Earth,  both  the  color  and 
the  flavor  vary  with  those  of  the  ground  through  which  it 
flows.  This  will  be  found  to  bo  the  case  on  actual  exami¬ 
nation. 

3.  The  lords  of  the  eight  quarters  of  tho  horizon 
beginning  from  the  east  and  going  round  fronnleft  to  right 
nre  India,  Agni,  Yama,  Nirurithi,  Varuna,  Yayu,  Soma  and 
Eesana. 

4-  There  are  eight  currents  bearing  the  same  names 
as  those  of  tho  eight  Dik-patis  (lords)  above  enumerated, 
and  there  is  a  big  current  in  the  centre  known  as  Mahasira. 
Besides  these  there  are  hundreds  of  well-known  minor 
'currents  bearing  distinct  names. 

5.  There  are  four  currents  issuing  from  the  centre  of 
tho  Earth  and  reaching  tho  east,  south,  west  and  north. 
These  are  good  currents.  There  are  four  other  currents 
runn  ing  towards  the  north-east,  south-east,  sonth-west  and 
north-west.  Those  produce  evil.  Wo  shall  now  proceed  to 
state  tho  several  indications  leading  to  the  discovery  of 
U.uder-  currents. 

6.  At  a  distance  of  3  cubits  to  the  west  of  tho 
Vetasa  (a)  growing  on  dry  lands  and  at  the  depth  of  a  man 
and  a  half,  thero  runs  a  current  westwards. 

7.  In  tho  course  of  digging  will  be  found  a  white 
frog  at  the  depth  of  half  a  man;  below  it  thero  will  be 
yellow-earth,  below  it  again  thero  will  be  a  piece  of  stoue 
blocking  up  tho  ourrent,  and  under  it  there  is  good  water. 

8.  At  a  distance  of  3  cubits  to  the  north  of 
the  Jarabu  and  at  the  depth  of  two  men  runs  a  current 
eastwards.  While  digging,  the  earth  will  be  found  to  be 

(o  ).  The  names  of  over  100  trees  are  given  in  this  chapter.  They 
are  explained  in  the  glossary  printed  at  tbe  end  i  f  Chapter  &5, 


BP.fHAT  SAMHITA. 


•white  and  of  tlio  color  of  metal  and  there  will  be  a  frog  at 
the  depth  of  a  man. 


9*  If  there  be  an  ant-hill  to  the  east  of  the  Jambu  and 
near  it,  there  runs  a  current  to  the  south  of  the  ant-hill  at 
the  depth  of  two  men.  The  water  will  be  very  sweet. 

10*  In  diggiug,  there  will  be  ft  fish  at  the  depth  of 
half  a  man ;  as  far  below  it,  there  will  he  a  stone  of  the 
color  of  the  dove  ;  below  it  again  there  will  bo  black  soil; 
and  below  it  there  will  be  water  which  will  last  for  years. 

11.  At  the  distance  of  3  cubits  to  the  west  of  the 
Udimibara  and  at  tho  depth  of  two  men  and  a  half  there 
runs  a  current  of  good  water.  In  digging,  there  will  bo 
found  a  white  snake  at  the  depth  of  a  man  c  below  it  there 
will  be  a  piece  of  stone  black  as  collyrium. 

12.  If  there  be  an  ant  hill  to  tho  north  of  the  Arjuna 
tree,  there  will  be  a  current  at  tho  distance  of  3  cubits  to 
the  west  of  the  hill  and  at  the  depth  of  3  mon  and  a  half. 

13.  In  digging  there  will  bo  found  a  white  iguana  at 
the  depth  of  half  a  man  ;  below  it,  at  tho  depth  of  a  man, 
will  bo  found  loose  black  earth  ;  below  it  will  bo  found  soil 
yellow-white  in  color  and  of  good  odor,  and  below  it  thcro 


will  be  much  water. 

14.  If  the  plant  known  as  Nirgundi  bo  seen  to  grow 
on  an  ant-hill,  there  will  be  a  current  at  a  distance  of  3 
cubits  to  the  south  of  the  hill  and  at  a  depth  of  two  men 
and  a  quarter.  Tho  water  will  last  for  ever  and  will  be 
sweet- 

15.  At  intervals  of  the  depth  of  half  a  man  there  will 
be  found  a  red  fish,  yellow  earth,  white  soil,  earth  mixed 
with  pebbles  and  finally  water. 

16.  If  there  bo  an  ant-hill  to  the  east  of  the  Badari, 
thoD,  to  tho  west  of  it  there  will  bo  water  at  the  depth  of  3 
men-  In  digging  there  will  be  found  a  white  house  lizard 
at  the  depth  of  half  a  man. 


T3RIHAT  iSAMtJJfA. 


BRIHAT  fliAMFUTA.  ['CK.  7. 

17.  Tf  both  the  Palasa  and  the  Budari  be  soon  to  grow 
together,  there  will  be  water  on  the  west  side  at  a  depth  of 
three  men  and  a  quarter.  In  digging  there  will  be  found  » 
frog  at  tho  depth  of  a  man. 

33.  If  the  Bilva  and  tho  Udumbnra  bo  soon  to  grow 
together,  there  will  be  a  current  at  a  distance  of  3  cubits 
to  the  south  and  at  a  depth  of  3  men.  In  digging  there 
will  bo  found  a  black  frog  at  tho  depth  of  half  a  man. 


19.  If  an  ant-hill  bo  seen  at  the  foot  of  the  Kako- 
dumbari,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  spot  at  a  depth^ot"  3 
men  and  a  half  running  westward- 


20.  In  digging,  at  tho  depth  of  half  a  man,  tho  soil 
will  be  found  yellow  white  ,*  below  it  there  will  be  a  stone 
of  the  color  of  milk  ;  and  below  it  there  will  bo  found  a  rat 
of  the  color  of  the  Kumuda. 

21.  If,  on  dry  lands,  tho  tree  Campilla  bo  seen  to 
grow,  there  will  bo  a  current  at  the  depth  of  3  cubits  to  the 
east  of  the  tree  and  the  current  will  ruu  southwards- 

22.  In  digging,  at  tho  depth  of  a  cubit  tho  soil  will 
bo  of  the  color  of  tho  blue  lotus,  or  of  the  dove.  Below  it 
there  will  be  seen  a  fish  of  tho  smell  of  the  goat  and  below 
it  there  will  be  a  small  quantity  of  salt  water. 

23.  On  tho  north-western  side  of  the  tree  Sonaka,  at  a 
distance  of  2  cubits  and  at  a  depth  of  3  men,  there  runs  a 
current  known  ns  Kumuda. 

24.  If  an  ant-hill  bo  seen  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
Vibhitaku  and  near  it,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  depth 
of  a  man  and  a  half*  to  the  east  of  tho  ant-hills. 

25.  If  an  aut-biU  be  seen  at  tho  distance  of  a  cubit  to 
the  west  of  the  Vibhitaka,  there  will  bo  a  current  at  tho 
depth  of  four  men  and  a  half  running  north  wards. 

23.  In  digging,  there  will  be  found  a  white  Viswara- 
bhara,  at  the  depth  of  a  man  ;  below  it  there  will  be  a 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA. 


msou  colured  stone.  The  current  that  runs  on  the  west¬ 
ern  side  will  dry  up  in  three  years. 

27.  If  au  ant-hill  overgrown  with  the  Kusa  grass  bo 
neon  on  the  north-eastern  side  of  the  Koviaarn,  there  will 
b  a  current  at  tho  depth  of  four  men  and  a  halt'  between  the 
tree  and  tho  ant-hill  and  the  water  supply  will  bo  inexhaus¬ 
tible. 

28.  In  digging,  there  will  bo  a  snake  of  tho  color  of 
the  inside  of  the  lotus  nud  at  the  depth  of  a  man  ;  below  it 
tho  soil  will  bo  rod  ;  below  it,  will  bo  found  a  precious  stone 
known  as  Kurviada. 

29.  If  an  ant-hill  be  soon  surrounding  the  foot  of  tho 
;  juptapurna,  there  will  be  a  current  to  tho  north  of  the  treo 
v  tho  depth  of  five  men  and  the  indications  aro  given 
below. 

30.  In  digging,  there  will  bo  seen  a  green  frog  at  the 
I  ptk  of  half  a  man  ;  below  it  the  soil  will  be  of  the  color 

of  yellow  orpiment  ;  below  it  there  will  be  found  a  stone  of 
t  he  color  of  the  clouds,  and  below  it  there  will  be  a  current 
of  good  water  running  northwards. 

31.  Generally,  if  a  frog  be  seen  below  a  tree,  there  will 
be  a  current  at  the  distance  of  a  cubit  from  the  treo  and  at 
the  depth  of  four  men  and  a  half. 

32.  In  digging  there  will  be  found  a  mongoose  at  tho 
depth  of  a  man  ;  below  it  there  will  be  black  soil ;  below  it; 
t;  -re  will  be  yellow  soil ;  below  it  there  will  be  white  soil ; 

n  i  t  below  it  will  bo  found  a  stone  resembling  the  skin  of 
the  frog. 

3-3.  If  a  snake  holo  be  seen  to  the  south  of  tho  Ka- 
anja,  thero  will  bo  a  current  at  the  distance  of  2  cubits  to 
rhe  south  of  the  hole  and  at  the  depth  of  three  men  and  a 

half. 

34.  In  digging,  there  will  bo  found  a  tortoise  at  the 
depth  of  half  a  man  ,•  below  it  thero  will  be  a  current  fiow- 


BRIWAT  SAMHITA. 


[CF-  7. 


ing  eastward  and  another  of  sweet  water  flowing  north¬ 
wards  •,  below  it  there  will  be  a  green  atone  and  below  it 
there  will  be  water. 

So.  If  a  snake  hole  be  seen  to  the  north  of  the  M  r- 
dhooka,  there  will  do  a  current  at  the  distance  of  5  cubits  to 
the  west  of  the  hole  and  at  a  depth  of  seven,  men  and  a 
half. 


Stb  In  digging,  at  the  depth  of  a  man  there  will  be 
found  a  cobra  ;  below  it  the  soil  will  be  rod -black  ;  below  it 
there  will  bo  a  stone  of  the  color  of  horse-gram ;  below  it 
there  will  be  a  entrant  flowing  eastwards — an  ever-running 
stream  covered  with  foam- 

37-  Tf  there  be  a  fine  ant-hill  overgrown  with  the 
kiiSa  grass  and  the  durva  grass  to  the  south  of  the  Timka 
tree,  there  will  be  a  current  to  the  west  of  the  hill  at  the 
depth  of  live  men  running  eastward. 

88,  If  a  snake  hole  bo  found  to  the  west  of  the  Ka- 
damha,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  distance  of  3  cubits  to 
the  south  of  the  hole  and  at  a  depth  of  five  men  and  three- 
quarters  of  a  man. 

39.  The  current  runs  in  a  northerly  course  ;  the  sup¬ 
ply  of  mineral  water  is  inexhaustible  ;  in  digging  there 
will  be  yellow  soil  at  the  depth  of  a  man  ;  below  it  there 
will  be  frog  of  the  color  of  gold. 

40.  If  either  the  Palm  or  the  Cocoa  be  surrounded 
by  an  ant-hill  at  its  foot,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  6  cubits  to  the  west  of  the  tree  and  at  a  depth  of 
four  men. 

41.  If  there  be  a  snake  hole  to  ilie  south  of  tho  Kapit- 
tnh,  there  will  be  a  current  at  a  distauco  of  7  cubits  to  tho 
north  of  the  hole  and  at  a  depth  of  five  men. 

42.  In  digging,  there  will  be  a  snake  of  many  colors 
at  the  depth  of  a  many  below  it  there  will  be  black  soil  ,* 
below  it  there  will  be  a  stone  blocking  up  the  current  ;  to 


tho  west  of  the  stone  there  will  bo  white  soil  and  below  it 
runs  a  current  northwards. 


43,  If  to  the  north  of  the  Asmaufcak.i  there  be  seen 
eiiiier  the  Badart  or  a  sunk©  hole,  then,  at  the  distance  of  0 
cubits  to  the  south  of  such  tree  or  hole,  there  will  be  a  cur  - 
vont  at  the  depth  of  three  men  and  a  half. 

44,  In  digging,  at  the  depth  of  a  man,  there  will  be  a 
tortoise  y  at  an  equal  depth  below  it  there  will  be  a  stone 
covered  with  dust  ;  below  it  again,  til#  soil  will  be  a  mix¬ 
ture  of  sand  aud  mud  ;and  below  it  there  will  be  seen  first 
a  current  flowing  southwards  ;and  to  the  north  of  this  there 
will  bo  another  current  running  eastwards. 

45,  If  to  the  north  of  the  Haridr  i  there  bo  seen  an 
ant-hill,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  distance  of  3  cubits 
to  the  oast  of  the  hill  ana  at  a  depth  of  five  uton,  and 
three-quarters  of  a  man. 

4o.  In  digging,  ah  t ho  depth  of  a  man,  there  will  bo 
a  black  snake,’  below  it  there  will  be  a  stone  green  as 
emerald  ;  below  it  there  will  be  black  soil  ;  below  it  there 
will  be  a  current  flowing  westwards,  and  to  the  south  eg 
this  current  there  will  be  another  current. 

47.  It  in  the  middle  of  an  arid  tract  of  land  there  be 
seen  to  grow  plants  or  trees  which  generally  grow  in  wot 
places,  or  if  \f coraim  am  the  Hurra  grass  be  seen  to  grOY1/ 
luxuriantly,  there  will  be  a  cun-oat  at  the  spot  at  the  depth 
of  a  matt. 

48.  There  will  also  be  a  current  at  the  distance  of  hvo 
dibits  to  tne  south  of  the  Bharangi,  Triyrita,  Dauii,  tSuk.i- 
rapaji,  Lakslmana  and  Navamatika,  aud  at  a  depth  of 
three  men. 

49.  Where  trees  are  seen  to  grow  luxuriantly  with 
low  branches  and  short  twigs,  there  will  bo  undercurrents 
in  the  neighbourhood  ;  bub  where  trees  are  seen  with  hole*: 


BtllHAT  SAMHITA- 


[Cl 


stiff  leaves  and  of  disagreeable  appearance,  there  will 
be  no  water  near. 


50  A  M.  If  the  trees  Tiluka,  Amrataka,  Yuvm)a,Blial la- 
taka,  Bijva,  Timluka,  AnkolU,  Pindarn,  Sirisha,  Anjatm, 
Parushaku,  Vanjnla  and  Atibata,  be  seen  to  grow  luxu¬ 
riantly  and  surrounded  by  ant-hills,  tliovo  will  be  a  current 
at  the  distance  of  three  cubits  to  the  north  of  the  treesand  at 
a  depth  of  four  men  and  a  half. 

52.  If  there  should  appear  a  spot  covered  with  grass 
where  there  is  usually  no  grass  or  a  spot  devoid  of  grass 
while  there  is  gross  all  round,  there  will  respectively  be 
under  such  spot  a  current  or  a  treasure. 

53.  If  a  thorny  tree  or  plant  should  grow  without 
thorns,  or  if  thorns  should  appear  on  trees  or  plants  that 
tire  without  them,  there  will  respectively  bo  a  current  or  a 
treasure  at  the  distance  of  three  cubits  to  the  west  of  the  spot 
and  at  a  depth  of  three  men  and  three  quarters  of  a  man. 

54.  Where  the  ground  when  struck  with  the  foot  p  o- 
duees  a  loud  sound,  there  w  ill  be  a  current  at  the  spot 
flowing  northwards  at  a  depth  of  three  men  and  a  half. 

55.  If  a  branch  of  a  tree  should  either  be  low  or  white, 
there  will  be  a- current  directly  under  it  at  the  depth  of 


tlu’fie  men. 

5(5.  If  the  fruits  or  flow  ers  of  a  tree  should  be  of 
extraordinary  growth  or  luxuriance,  there  would  be  a 
current  at  the  distanoe  of  three  cubits  to  the  east  of  the  tree 
and  at  a  depth  of  four  men.  Under  the  current  there  avo 

stones  and  yellow  soil. 

57.  If  the  Kantakarika  should  be  seen  to  grow  with¬ 
out  thorns  or  with  white  blossoms,  there  will  be  a  current 
at  the  spot  at  a  depth  of  three  men  and  a  ha!  f. 

58.  If  the  Kh&rjuri  should  bo  seen  to  grow  with  only 


BRIM*.  S/UtHITA* 


ranches  in  the  middle  of  an  arid  tract,  there  will  be  & 
current  to  the  west  of  the  tree  at  a  depth  of  three  men. 


59.  If  the  Karnifeara  or  Palasa  be  seen  with  white 
blossoms,  there  Avill  be  a  current  at  a  distance  of  two  cubits 
to  the  north  of  the  tree  and  at  a  depth  of  three  men. 

CO.  Where  there  is  heat  or  smoko,  thero  will  be  a 
current  at  the  spot  at  a  depth  of  two  men.  The  current 
will  be  oue  of  great  dimensions  carrying  a  largo  body  of 
water. 


61.  Where  the  crops  are  found  to  die  out  or  appear 
over-luxuriant  or  very  white,  there  will  be  a  largo  current 
at  the  spot  at  the  depth  of  two  men. 

62.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  under¬ 
currents  in  arid  tracts  of  land.  The  currents  are  generally  of 
the  shape  of  the  ass’s  neck. 

63.  If  an  ant-hill  bo  aeon  to  the  north  east  of  the 
Peelu  tree,  there  will  be  a  current  to  the  west  of  such  ant¬ 
hill  running  northwards  at  a  depth  of  five  men. 

04,  In  digging,  the  soil  will  bo  found  to  be  of  the 
color  of  a  mixture  of  green  and  yellow  at  the  depth  of  a 
man;  then  at  equal  depths  there  will  be,  one  below  the 
other,  green  earth,  then  a  stone,  and  then  water. 

65.  If  an  ant-hill  bo  seen,  to  the  east  of  the  Peelu 
tree,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  distance  of  four  and  a 
half  cubits  to  the  south  of  it  and  at  a  depth  of  seven  men, 

66.  In  digging,  at  the  depth  of  a  man,  thero  will  be  a 
snake  spotted  black  and  white  and  of  the  length  of  a  cubit ; 
to  the  south  of  it  there  will  be  a  largo  current  of  salt  water. 

67.  If  n  snake  hole  be  seen  to  the  north  of  the  Kareera 
then  to  the  south  of  it  there  will  be  a  current  of  sweet  water 
at  a  depth  of  ten  n  n ;  in  digging  thero  will  bo  seen  an 
yellow  frog  at  the  depth  of  a  man. 

68.  If  a  snake  hole  bo  seen  tc  the  west  of  the  Robitaka 


69.  If  an  ant- lull  be  Been  to  the  cast  of  tho  Inclrataru, 
there  will  bo  a  current  at  the  distance  of  a  cubit  to  the 
west  oi  the  bill  and  at  a  depth  of  f  ourteen  men  ;  in  digging 
there  Will  be  seen  an  iguana  of  brown  color  at  the  depth 
of  a  in  an, 


70.  If  a  snake  hole  be  Been  to  the  north  of  the  Suvar- 
na  frooj  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  distance  of  two  cubits 
to  the  south  of  tho  hole  and  at  a  depth  of  fifteen  men. 

71.  The  water  iti  the  above  spot  will  be  saltish  ;  in 
digging,  there  will  be  a  mongoose  at  tho  depth  of  half  a 
mm  ;  below  it  there  will  be  a  copper  colored  stone,  below 
it  there  will  be  red  soil,  and  below  it  there  will  be  water 
running  southwards. 

7i  If  the  Radar*  and  the  Rohita  be  seen  to  grow  to¬ 
gether,  though  there  may  be  no  ant-hill  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood,  there  will  bo  fi  current  at  tho  distance  of  three  cubits 
to  the  west  of  the  trees  and  at  a  depth  of  sixteen  men. 

73.  In  digging,  there  will  be  seen  a  scorpion  at  the 
depth  of  a  man  ;  below  it  there  will  be  white  soil;  below  it 
there  will  be  a  stone  i*esetnbling  a  ball  of  flour,  and  below 
it  rims  a  current  of  sweet  water  flowing  southwards  ;  to  the 
north  of  this  current  there  will  be  another  current. 


74.  If  the  Badari  and  the  Kareera  bo  seen  to  grow  to¬ 
gether,  there  will  boa  large  current  at  a  distance  of  three 
cubits  to  the  west  of  the  trees  and  at  a  depth  of  eighteen 
men  flowing  iu  a  north-easterly  direction. 

75.  If  the  Peelu  and  the  Badari  be  seen  to  grow  to¬ 
gether,  there  will  be  a  current  containing  an  abundant; 
supply  of  salt  water  at  a  distance  of  three  cubit*  to  the  east 
f4  the  trees  and  at  a  depth  of  twenty  men. 


BRIIIAT  SAM  HIT  A- 


If  the  Kakubha  bo  seen  to  grow  with  either  tie 
bamboo  or  the  Silva*  there  will  bo  a  current  at  tho  distance 
of  two  cubits  to  the  west  of  the  trees  and  at  a  depth  o£ 
twenty-five  men. 


77.  If  either  tie  Dhnrva  or  tic  Kim  grass  be  seen  to 
grow  whito  on  ant-hills,  a  well  may  be  sunk  at  the  spot 
and  the  current  runs  at  the  depth  of  twenty-one  men. 


78.  Where  the  Kailamba  is  seen  to  grow  or  ant-hills 
are  found  overgrown  with  Dhnrva  grass,  there  will  be  a 
current  at  the  distance  of  three  cubits  to  the  west  of  snob 
tree  or  hills  and  at  a  depth  of  twenty-five  men. 

79.  Tf  the  Rohitaka  tree  be  seen  to  grow  in  the  middle 
of  three  ant-hills  with  three  other  trees,  there  will  be  an 
undercurrent  at  the  spot. 

80.  In  digging,  there  will  be  a  stone  at  a  distance  of 
four  cubits  and  sixteen  inches  to  the  north  of  tho  central 
spot  and  at  a  depth  of  forty  men- 

81.  If  the  Sami  is  found  covered  with  knots  and  au 
ant-hill  be  seen  to  the  north  of  it,  there  will  be  a  current  at 
tho  distance  of  five  cubits  to  the  west  of  the  hill  and  at  a 
depth  of  fifty  men. 

82-  If  of  several  ant-hills  in  a  spot,  the  central  one  bo 
white,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  spot  at  the  depth  of 
fifty-five  men. 


88*  If  the  Palasa  tree  be  seen  to  grow  with  the  Sami 
trees,  there  will  be  a  ourreufc  to  the  west  of  the  trees  at  the 
depth  of  sixty  men.  In  digging,  there  will  be  seen  a  snake 
at  the  depth  of  half  a  man  and  below  it  there  will  be  yellow 
soil  mixed  with  sand. 

84-  If  tlio  white  Rohitaka  tree  be  seen  surrounded  by 
ant-hills,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  distance  of  a  cubit  to 
the  west  of  the  tree  and  at  the  depth  of  seventy  men. 

>  if  the  Sami  be  seen  white  and  full  of  thorns  there 


UimiAT  8AMHITA. 


[c 


<§L 


bi’  a  onrrent  to  the  south  of  the  tree  at  a  depth  of 
seventy-five  mea  In  digging  there  will  bo  found  a  etiaka 
at  the  depth  of  half  a  man. 

86.  It  would  bo  wrong  to  proceed  to  judge  of  under¬ 
currents  in  dry  but  fertile  lands  from  the  several  indications 
given  for  arid  lands.  As  regards  the  Jambu  and  the  Velasa, 
the  depths  of  undercurrents  given  for  these  trees  shall  be 
doubled  if  the  trees  are  seen  to  grow  in  avid  lands. 


87  &  88.  If  the  trees  Jamba,  Trivrita,  M'nvva,  Sisurnari, 
Sttvibn,  Siva,  Ryama, Veerudhi,  Varabi,  Jyoliahmati,  Garnda- 
vnga,  Sukarika,  Maelinpurnn,  Yyaghrapada ore. seen  to  grow 
by  the  wide  of  snake  holes,  there  will  bo  an  undercurrent  to 
tho  north  of  the  holes  at  tho  distance  of  three  cubits  and  at 
a  depth  of  three  men  and  a  half. 

89.  The  above  apply  to  purely  wet  lands.  But  if 
the  trees  arc  seen  to  grow  in  dry  but  fertile  lands,  the  depth 
of  undercurrents  will  be  five  men  and  in  aria  lands  the 
depth  will  be  seven  men. 

90.  In  tho  case  of  lands  in  which  neither  trees  nor 
plants  are  seen  to  grow,  in  which  no  ant-hills  are  found  to 
grow,  and  which  present  a  smooth  and  even  appearance, 
there  will  be  nndorcurreufs  in  those  spots  where  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  soil  is  of  an  unusual  nature. 


91 .  For  instance,  if  the  spot  appears  wet  or  hollow  or 
sandy,  or  if  it,  be  found  to  resound  to  the  tread  of  foot,  there 
will  bo  a  current  at  the  depth  of  four  and  a  half  or  fivo  men. 


92-  fiiero  ate  undercurrents  containing  an  abundant 
supply  of  water  to  the  south  of  trees  of  luxuriant  growth 
;  »d  at  the  depth  of  four  men.  Id  places  full  of  trees,  if  tho 
o-voirad  should  present  any  unusual  appearance,  the  existence 
of  the  dorr  out  may  bo  determined  &s  stated  above. 


93.  In  dry  bat  fertile  lands  ns  well  as  in  wet  lauds,  if 
the  ground  be  found  to  sink  under  the  foot,  there  wilt  be  a 


BBIKAT  SAMIIITA. 

at  iho  cfepth  of  a  man  and  a  half;  and  If 
arc  no  houses  iu  ilio  neighbourhood,  worms  are  seen  in  large 
quantities,  there  will  be  an  undercurrent  at  the  spot. 

94.  If  the  ground  be  felt  both  hot  and  cold,  them  will 
he  hot  and  cold  currents  at  the  spot  nt  a  depth  of  three  men 
and  a  half;  and  if  a  rainbow,  a  fish  or  an  ant-hill  bo  seen 
at  the  spot,  there  will  be  a  current  at  the  distance  of  four 
cubits  from  them  and  at  a  depth  of  three  men  and  a  half. 

95.  If,  of  a  number  of  ant-hills  about  a  spot,  one  bo 
seen  above  the  rest,  there  will  bo  a  current  under  it,  and 
there  will  also  bo  currents  iu  places  where  crops  do  not  grow. 

96.  If  fcho  Banyan,  the  Palasa  and  the  Udumbara  trees 
be  seen  to  grow  together,  there  will  be  a  current  under 

them.  If  the  Banyan  and  the  Pippala  trees  bo  seen  to 
grow  together,  there  will  bo  a  current  to  the  north  of  the 
trees. 

97.  If  a  well  bo  situated  to  the  south-east  of  a  vil¬ 
lage  or  a  town,  there  will  bo  much  suffering  from  various 
iears  find  from  thirst. 

98.  If  the  well  bo  situated  iu  the  south-western  qua\’- 
ter,  children  will  perish.  If  in  the  north-west,  women  will 
suffer.  Wells  situated  in  tho  north-east  will  conduce  to 
prosperity. 

99.  I  have  thus  stated  in  the  Avya  metre  the  views  of 
the  Sage  Saiaswata  on  the  subject  of  Undercurrents.  I 
shall  now  proceed  to  stafeo  the  views  of  Manu  on  the  same 
subjects 

100.  Wherever  trees,  shrubs  and  creepers  are  seen  to 
grow  luxuriantly,  with  glossy  and  uninjured  leaves,  there 
are  undercurrents;  and  there  are  also  undercurrents  iu 
places  where  the  Padraa,  Ksiinra,  Usira,  Kula,  Gundra, 
Khsa,  Knsa,  and  JS7alika  are  seen  to  grow. 

101  &  102.  There  are  undercurrents  in  places  where 
the  Kliarjura,  Jamba,  Arjuna  and  the  Vetasa  Irees  are  seen 


<8L 

there 


rent 


BRUT  AT  SWU't'A. 


. 


^ow,  or  where  there  grow  milky  trees,  shrubs  and  creep¬ 
ers,  or  whero  the  Chatra,  Ibha,  ISfaga,  Satapatrn,  Neepa, 
Sind o vara  and  Nakfcamala  trees  are  aeon  to  grow.  Again, 
where  tho  tree  Yibhitaka  or  Madayautika  is  seen  to  grow, 
there  will  he  a  current  nt  tho  spot  at  a  depth  of  three  men. 
If  rocks  are  found  one  over  the  other,  there  will  be  under- 
Currents  at  a  depth  of  three  men  at  their  foot. 

103.  Where  the  earth  is  found  overgrown  with  th° 
Munji  grass,  with  reeds  and  with  the  Kusa  grass,  tho  soil 
black  and  mixed  with  pebbles^  us  well  as  in  places  where  tho 
soil  is  black  or  red,  there  will  be  undercurrents  containing 
a  large  supply  of  sweet  water. 

104.  If  the  soil  bo  red  and  mixed  with  pebbles,  the 
water  will  bo  astringent  in  its  flavor  j  if  it  bo  brown,  tho 
water  will  *be  saline;  if  white,  it  will  be  saltish  ;  and  if 
black  it  will  bo  sweet* 

105.  Wherever  tho  trees  Saka,  Aswakarna,  Arjunn, 
Bilva,  Savjn,  Sreeparni,  Arishta,  JDhava,  and  Simsapa  are 
found  to  grow,  or  where  the  leaves  of  trees,  bushes  and  creep¬ 
ers  are  found  perforated  with  holes,  or  where  such  trees > 
bushes  and  creepers  pub  on  a  forbidding  appearance,  there 
will  be  no  water  iu  the  neighbourhood. 

XOvi.  If  tho  ground  be  seen  of  the  color  of  the  sun, 
fire,  ashes,  cnmol  or  ass,  therb  will  be  no  water  in  the  loca¬ 
lity.  But  if  tho  bambu  be  seen  to  shoot  out,  of  a  red  color, 
or  if  the  soil  be  found  red,  there  will  bo  undercurrents  lying 
immediately  under  stones. 

107.  Where  there  are  found  stones  of  tho  color  of 
Yyd  uiya,  kidney- bean  or  of  the  clouds  or  of  the  color  of 
tho  fruit  of  the  fig  tree  when  about  torJpen>or  of  tho  color 
of  the  bee  or  coUyrium  or  of  brown  color,  there  will  bo  water 
in  the  neighbourhood. 

10b.  If  the  stone  be  of  the  color  of  the  pigeoo,  of 


B  BID  AT  RAMTUTA- 


my,  of  glioo,  or  of  white  bilk,  cr  of  the  color  of  the  Sown 
plant,  there  will  bo  an  abundant  supply  of  water  in  the 


neighbourhood. 

109.  But  if  the  stone  bo  red  or  with  spots  of  various 
colors,  or  of  the  color  of  the  white  ashes  orjtbe 'camel,  thu 
hhs  or  the  bee,  or  of  the  color  of  the  Augushtika  flower  or 
of  the  color  of  the  sun  or  lire,  there  will  ho  no  water  iu  the 
neighbourhood. 

lit).  Where  etonC9  are  found  of  the  color  of  the  moon¬ 
light  or  crystal  or  pearl  or  gold,  or*of;the  color  “of  Vermil¬ 
lion  or  oollyriiun,  or  of  tho  color  of  the  rising  sun,  or  of  the 
color  of  haritala,  that  is,  sulphuret  of  ursenit',  there  would 
bo  prosperity.  Tima  have  wo  stated  tho  views  of  Maun  on 
the  subject  of  [Jndei’currcnta. 

1U.  Stones  which  cannot  be  broken  andt\vhich  con¬ 
duce  to  prosperity,  are  dwelt  in  by  tho  Yakshas  and  the  Na- 
gas  at  all  times.  Countries  in  which  such  stones  are  found 
will  never  suffer  from  drought. 

112.  If  stouos  that  cannot  bo  broken  be  heated  in  the 
fire  fed  by  the  dry  leaves  and  the  wood  of  the  Tiuduka  true 
“rid  then  drenched  in  lime  water,  they  can  be  easily 
broken  ; 

113.  Or  mix  the  ashes  of  thejMokshnka  with  water 
heat  the  mixture,  add  to  it  the  juice  of  reeds  («*«»■*)  and 
drench  the  stones  seven  times  with  the  preparation,  then 
heat  thu  stone  it  will  become  brittle  } 

114.  Or  mix  together  butter-milk,  boiled  rice  water 
and  arrack,  and  throw  into  the  mixture  a  quantity  of  hoise- 
gram  and  tho  fruit  of  tho  Badari,  keep  the  mixture  for  seven 
days  and  then  drench  the  stoue  with  it  and  heat  it,  it  will 
become  brittle. 


U5  Soak  in  the  urine  of  the  cow  the  leaves  of  the 

a 


UK J  HAT  SAMHITA. 


Ergosa  as 'well  as  iho  |8esr:nuua  "plant,  and  the 'plants 
Apamarga,  Tindukunnd  Quduchi._ar.id  obtain  a  decocti<)ji>' 
After  drenching. the  stone  with.  iisixAimes  heat  th^stones, 
it  will  become  brittle. 


1 1 G.  Form  a  mixture  of  the  Juice  of  the  pfatit  .Cnlotvo- 
pih  gigantea,  the  blatk.  powder  of  the  bwbnt  horft  pf  the 
ram,  the  excrooiQirb  df  the  turtle  dove  pftd  of  the  rat,  rub 
this  over  tho  ..#ton#  cutter’s  chistle,  stji'  it  in  oil.  and  then 


temper  the  fiastruiuont.  It  will  hecauUL  / 


117.  Or  mix  together,  the  juice  of  the  plantain  or 
butter  milk.  Alliw  the  mixture  to  remain-so  for  a  day  arid 
thou  temper  iu  it  any  cutting  instrument  whiSh^sbaU  after¬ 
wards  be  rubbed  a‘gaiust  the  wet  stone.  The  in'k^uiuent 
will  never  break  when  w orked  in  stone  or  metals-  v 

1 1 8.  There  will  be  an  abundant  supply  pf  water  under 
the  bank  at  the' foot  of  a  mountain,  if  the  hank  'runs  fron^ 
cast  to  west  aud  not  if  it  runs  front  north  to  south.  Where, 


there  may  be  streams  .running  along  the  Isfcnjyjhe  bank 
breaks  generally  when  the  waves 


’ '  'Na.trike  aginst  it7~~Iu  tlio 

absence  of  such  streams  water  shall  be  collected  by  the  aido 

»  n 


- 

of  the  bank  by  means  of  dykes  constructed  of  atones  or 
wood.  The  water  shall  then  be  stirred  up  by  horses,  ele¬ 
phants  and  other  animals,  the  waves  dashing  against  the 
bank  will  break  it. 

119.  Along  the  margin  of  a  pond  or  other  piece  of 
water  shall  be  grown  tlie  Kakubha,  the  Banyan*  the  Mango, 
the  riiitcha,  the  Kudamba,  the  Niohula,  the  Jambu?  the 
Vet  as  a,  the  Neepa,  the  Knray&ka,  the  Tala,  the  As, olca,  the 
Madhuka,  and  the  Vakula. 

120.  In  the  case  of  tanks  a  sluice  or  an  outlet  for 
water  shall  be  erected  of  stones  in  cue  spot.  It  should  be 
capable  of  being  closed  by  means  of  thick  beam  shutters  or 


BRlHAT  SAMiriTA. 


tbrcmi  between  stones,  and  when  closed  the  other 
side  shall  bo  covered  with  earth  to  prevent  tho  escape  of 
water. 


* 


% 


121*  The  fragrant  plants  o£  Anjana,  Mnsfca  and  Useera 
together  with  the  powder  of  Rajakos&taka  arid  Am  a!  aka  and 
wi  fruit  of  the  Kataka, 'shall  bo  thrown  into  well*}. 


ft 22.  If  the  well  water'  be'  muddy,  bitter,  brackish, 
wifhoufc  flavor  or  of  bad  smell,  it  will  become  clear  sweet, 
fragrant  and  possessed  of  other  good  properties. 

123.  The  work  of  sinking  wells  shall  ho  commenced 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  one  of  the  asterisks  of 
M>gha,  Anuradha,  Pushya,  Dhamishta,  IT.  Phalguni,  U. 
Asbadiin,  U.  Proshtnpada,  Roliini  and  Sat  ay  a, 

124.  Puja  shall  be  performed  to  (led  Varuna,  and  a 
pike  of  the  Banyan  or  Vefcasa  shall  be  driven  into  the  ground 
at  the  spot  directly  over  the  current  after  due  puja  to  it 
with  flowers,  sandal  paste  and  perfumed  smoke. 

125.  I  have  already  treated  of  tho  subject  of  rains, 
adopting  tho  views  of  Baladeva,  and  now  by  the  grace  of 
the  Munis,  I  have  well  treated  of  the  subject  of  Under 
currents. 


CHAPTER  VIIL  (65)* 
On  Gardening. 


1.  The  sides  of  rivers  and  lakes  and  other  water  banks 
will  not  be  pleasant  and  agreeable  if  devoid  of  shady  trees. 
It  is  therefore  necessary  to  form  gardens  on  the  banks  of 
waters. 

2.  Soft  soil  is  congenial  to  the  growth  of  all  trees. 
Such  a  soil  should  be  selected  for  the  garden*  and  the  Sesa- 
mum  plant  should  Grsc  be  grown  in  it.  As  soon  as  the  plant 


w^»r  w' iff*r'r. r* * * ■ to rwrri r  p  •  ^rv.y  •> 


BKTHAT  BA  if  HIT  A, 


to  bear  blossoms,  it  must  be  cut  and  removed  from 
tho  spot. 

3.  The  trees  Arishtft(a},  Asoka,  l^unrmga  and  Slrislia 
shall  be  grown  cither  in  gardens  or  in  houses  by  their 
seeds  and  they  will  oomluce  to  prosperity. 

4  &  5.  The  trees  Panasa*  Asoka,  Plantain, 

Likncha,  Dadima,  D  rales  ha,  Palivata,  Bojnpura  and  Atimuk- 
taka  shall  bo  grown  by  planting  eithei*  their  roots  after 
clipping  them  or  their  branches,  smearing  cow-dtuig  over  the 
parts  cut. 

6.  Trees  that  grow  without  branches  shall  bo  grown 
in  the  Sisira  season,  and  in  the  Homanta  shall  be  grown 
trees  that  grow  with  branches ;  in  the  winter  season  shall  bo 
grown  trees  possessing  good  trunk.  Tho  trees  may  bo 
planted  in  any  quarter  of  the  garden. 

7.  The  growing  of  trees  by  smearing  over  them  from 
tho  root  to  the  branches  a  mixture  of  gheo,  of  Usira,  of 
Sesamum  seeds,  of  honey,  of  Vidanga,  of  milk  and  of  cow 
dung,  is  known  as  Sankramana  growth. 

8.  Tho  person  planting  tho  tree  shall  do  so  after 
bathing  ami  after  washing  it  with  water  and  adorning  it 
with  sandal.  The  trees  will  then  bear  the  loaves  of  their 
paronfc  breos. 

9.  In  tho  dry  season  tho  trees  shall  be  watered  both 
In  tho  morning  and  evening  ;  in  tho  cold  season  they  shall 
be  watered  at  mid-day,  and  in  the  rainy  season  whenever 
tho  ground  is  found  dry. 

10  &  11.  The  Jambn,  tho  Yetasa,  tho  Vancera,  tho 
Kadambn,  tho  Udnmbara,  the  Arjuua,  the  Boejapumka,  tho 
Mridvika,  tho  Lakuclfa,  the  Dadina,  tho  Vanjnla,  the  N-ikta- 


( (0-  Art3bta,  &c.  For  an  explanation,  vi»lo  glossary  at  tho  eud  of  this 
chapter. 


BUTTTAT  8AMJTITA* 

the  Tilled i  tho  Parmsii,  the  Timira  and  the  Amrut&kn 
fchal l  bo  grown  on  wot  soil. 

12*  An  interval  of  twenty  cubits  between  trees  is  the 
best;  one  of  sixteen  is  passable;  aud  one  ^  of  twelve  U 
injurious, 

13,  The  trees  that  are  planted  very  near  each  other 
get  their  branches  interwoven  as  well  as  their  roots  aud 
such  trees  get  choked  and  do  not  grow  well. 

14,  Cold  winds  and  hot  sun  produce  diseases  in  trees., 
and  tho  trees  tnrn  white  and  do  not  put  forth  new  leaves; 
tho  branches  bccomo  dry  and  tho  juico  oozes  out, 

15,  Toe  u  re  tho  tree  of  these  diseases,  first  scrape  off 
or  otherwise  remove  the  parts  dead  from  tho  tree  with  a 
knife  >  rub  over  the  parts  a  mixture  of  Vidanga,  gheo  and 
miro  and  pour  at  tho  roots  water  mixed  with  milk. 

10.  If  the  fruits  are  seen  to  die  out,  then  heat  a  mix** 
tore  of  hoi’so  gram,  black  gram  and  Mudga  (kidney  bean), 
sesamum  seeds  and  barley ;  after  tho  mixture  lias  fully 
cooled  pour  it  at  tho  roots.  Then  tho  trees  ^iU  yield  an 
increase  of  flowers  and  fruits. 

17  &  18,  Get]  two  adlmkas  ( a)  of  the  excrement  of 
the  goat  and  tho  ram,  an  adhaka  of  Sesamum  seed,  half  an 
ndhaka  of  saktu(6),  an  aclhaka  of  water  and  a  tula  (c)  ofjeow’s 
ilosh.  Form  a  mixture  of  these,  keep  it  untouched  for  seven 
days,  and  if  at  the  end  of  tho  time  spreading  creepers, 
plants  and  trees  bo  watered  with  tho  mixture,  (lowers  and 
fruits  will  grow  in  abundance. 

19  &  20.  Keep  the  seech  soaked  in  milk  for  ton  days; 
then  rubbing  ghee  over  the  hands  the  seed  shall  bo  taken 
up  in  the  hands  aud  passed  from  baud  to  hand  till  it  is 


(d),  A-.lhaka  is  two  Madras  taoutsuri 

(b) .  Saktn,  the  floor  of  barley  or  rico  fried  and  gjffti.it> 

(t).  Tula.  One  hundred  pa?a-9., 


rsnillAT  SAMTIITA. 


[oh' 


(SI. 


•eel  with  ghee*  tfc  Shall  then  bo  rubbed  over  several 
times  with  cow- dung  and  exposed  to  the  smoko  of  the  flesh 
of  the  hog  mid  fcho  deer.  It  shall  then  be  mixed  with  the 
serum  or  marrow  (of  the  flesh)  of  the  fish  and  the  pig,  and 
whem  dry  it  shall  bo  sown  in  a  well  prepared  soli  and  watered 
with  a  -mixture  of  milk  and  water.  Whoa  it  grows,  it  will 


grow  with  flowers 

iSHw  i  ami  m 


2 1 .  Mix  together  the  flour  of  rice,  of  blaitfk  grmn  and  of 
Sosa  mum  seeds  with  the  flour  of;  barley  (fried  before  ground) 
with  the  dead  or  decayed  fleshy  and  with  a  small  quantity  of 
water;  soak  the  seed  of  the  tamarind  in  the  mixture  and 
expose  it  to  the  smoke  of  the  root  of  the  turmeric*  l  hj} 
seed  when  sown  will  grow  as  a  creeper* 


22  &  23,  Put  into  the  milk  of  the  cow  the  roots  of 
Asphotn,  Dhatri,  Dhaa,  Yasika,  Palasini,  Yetasn,  Bury* 
avalli,  Syama  and  Atimukta  and  heat  the  milk  on  fire; 
after  it  has  cooled,  put  into  it  the  seed  of  the  Kapifctha  and 
allow  it  to  soak  for  100  gh&bikas  (cij  and  dry  the  seed  in 

the  sun  for  80  days.  If  the  seed  be  then . sowii  in  the  soil 

it  will  grow  as  a  creeper. 

. 24 , 25  &  26.  Dig  a  pit  in  the  ground  a  cubit  square 

and  two  cubits  deep,  and  fill  it  with  water  prepared  with  a 
mixture  of  the  flesh  of  the  fish*  Allow  the  pit  to  dry  up 
completely;  dry  it  further  by  means  of  fire ;  iub  the  sides 
and  bottom  with  a  mixture  of  honey >  ghee  and  allies,  fill  the 
pit  now  with  the  flour  of  black  gram,  of  hesamum  seeds  and 
Of  barley  mixed  with  earth ;  pour  over  the  pit  water  pre- 
pared  with  the  flesh  of  the  fish  and  pound  the  mixture  well 
till  it  becomes  hard.  Sow  any  seed  at  a  depth  of  tour 
inches  and  water  it  with  the  water  of  the  fish.  The  seed, .will 
grow  as  a  fine  creeper  witli  tender  lejf\^JEri^.03Lfir.  terraces  anj. 
the  roof  of  hottsoa  in  a 

(a)4  A  ghatlkn  ie  24  minutes. 


BRIHAT  SAMHITA, 


7  &  28*  Soak  any  seed  one  hundred  times  either  in 
the  Ivalka  (decoction)  or  in  the  oil  of  Anko]u,or  in  the  fruit 


of  the  Sleshmataka,  The  moment,  the  seed  is  put  n&to  tha 
ground  it  grows  with  biauohes  laden  with  f x  u.its *  .  .What 
wonder ! 


29  &  80.  Soak  any  seed  in  the  fruit  ot  the  Slash  mat  aka 
after  removing  its  seeds,  and  the  a  soak  it  in  the  water  yoiuu 
of  the  ripe  fruit  of  Ankola  and  dry  it  in  shade  ;  repeat  the 
operation  seven  times  *  rub  the  seed  over  with  the  dung  ot 
the  buffalo,  and  keep  it  buried  in  the  same  dung  for  some 
time  ;  then  sow  it  in  the  soil  drenched  with  the  waters  ot 
the  coeoumit.  The  seed  will  grow  and  bear  fruits  in  a  day, 

81.  When  the  Moon  passes  through  any  of  ihe  fixed, a) 
aster  is  ms  or  the  soft(i>)  abterisms,  or  through  the  aster isms 
ofMooia,  Vi&akha,  Push  ye,  Sravana,  Asyini  and  Hasta* 
trees  shall  be  planted  or  seeds  sown  according  to  the  views 
of  Sages  possessed  of  the  inner  eye  of  knowledge. 


Notes, — The  following  liavo  been  extracted  from  a 
work  known  as  Bnhat  Sctvngadlara. 

1 .  Mix  with  earth  a  variety  of  fragrant)  flowers  ;  use 
the  mixture  as  manure  to  a  tree  ot  scentless  flowers ;  pour 
at  the  roots  the  juice  of  Chav  a  and  Khadira;  smear  over 
the  tree  sandal  paste,  and  expose  the  tree  to  the  smoke  of 
ghee ;  its  scentless  flowers  wilt  become  hignufl. 

2.  "Uso  m  manure  to  the  roots  of  the  cotton  the  leaves 
of  barley,  Scsanium  and  o£  turmeric,  and  pouv  at  the  loots 
water  prepared  with  a  mixture  of  these  leaves,  liio  phuifc^ 
will  y ield  cotton  tli rou ghout  th o  y ear  bright  i * p dv jc d  a*,  fi jjj * 

3.  Mix  with  water  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane  and  the  root 


(a)  The  fixed  aateii^uis  tuo  RcLum  U.  Yl  e l^uiv I,  U,  Asliatlu  ai  d  U. 
[ty  1  'hko  sortafitijnsms  are  Alri&asirslia*  Churn,,  Aimrarika  find  Itayaii, 


BHIHAT  SAMIUTA.  [C0 

*rid«ri  ;  heat  the  mixture  and  rub  it  over  the  roots  of 
any  flowering  tree,  and  pour  at  tbo  roots  tho  juice  ol  the 
BUgarcftuo.  The  trees  will  yield  flowers  at ^UMgLSSSgg5g- 

4.  Make  oabos  ofa  mixture  of  Madhuyashfci,  sngar^ 
koslita  uutlMadliupushpa.  andcuver  with tlio  cakes  the  roots 
of  fruit  trees  and  throw  earth  over  tbo  parts.  The_fmt3_wiU 
gio w  without  bt>n OS* 

5.  u iff  &  goat  and  immediately  tie  its  shoulder  skin 

ov.-r'  the  branches  of  fruit  trees,  r<ill,uiu 

unripe., 

th  Pound  in  a  stone  mortar  the  bono  of.  the  monkey 
mixed  with  the  juice  of  tbo  elephant  in  rut ;  rub  the  pre¬ 
paration  over  tbo  roots  of  fruit  trees.  IWruiblJSiUjS; 
main  unripe  for  yeari 

y]  Tie  over  thvTbranoUcs  of  fruit  trees  the  skin  of  an 
animal  and  grass  ;  rub  over  the  branches  a  mixture  of  Vi- 
dang#,  hooey  and  milk  ;  pour  nt  the  roots  a  nurture  of 
milk  and  water.  The  n]re  fruits  will  stick  to  th^, tree  j«r 
a  very  long  tinjj}. 

8.  Mix  with  milk  the  serum  or  marrow  (of  flesh)  of  the 
fish  and  the  hog  as  well  as  the  flesh  of  the  two  creatures. 
Beak  any  seed  in  the  mixture  ;  dry  it  and  expose  it  to  tho 
smoke  of  ghee-  Tho  seed  when  sown  will  growjn,  utxjtu; 
usual  and  w o u &tn  f ul  maiijn o v ♦ 

9.  If  the  seed  of  tho  pomegranate  be  soaked  in  tho 
blood  of  the  oock  21  times  dried  and  each  time,  it  will,  the 
moment  it  is  put  into  tho  ground,  grow  and  bear  fruits  in  tv 
most  wonder f  u  1  manner* 

[0.  Thrust  into  tho  root  of  the  Kumada  (the  esculent 
white  water  lily)  a  variety  of  colors,  soak  tno  loot  in  urino, 
rub  over  it  gkco  and  honey?  and  then  sow  it  in  tho  soil,  it 


BRIHAT  SAM  HIT  A* 


solors  origina 


gr o w  ana  boar  flowers  of  the  seve L*al 
P u li-PM  thej:,Qot. 

11.  Mix  together  the  buffalo’s  dung  and  urine,  rub 
the  mixture  over  the  seed  of  the  fruit  o£  the  Kutunda  for 
seven  days  drying  the  seed  each  lime.  If  the  seed  bo 
then  sown  into  the  ground,  it  will  grow  as  a  Karavira  plant. 

12.  Soak  the  seed  of  the  pumpkin  or  of  the  brinjal, 
or  of  the  serpent  cucumber  and  the  like  in  the  serum  or 
marrow  (of  flesh)  of.  the  fish  or  hog  and  dry  the  seed.  If 
the  seed  bo  thou  sown  in  good  soil  and  watered  it  will 
bear  fruits  of  very  large  size  and  without  bones*. 

IS.  Soak  the  seed  of  the  Castor  oil  plant  in  the  blood 
and  serum  (of  flesh)  of  the  hog  and  dry  it;  soak  it  again  in 
the  oil  of  the  An  kola  and  dry  it.  If  the  seed  be  now  sown 
in  the  soil,  it  will  grow  and  bear  the  fruits  of  Kara, vail L 

14.  Use  as  manure  to  the  root  of  the  plantain  the 
excrement  of  the  ass  and  the  horse  ;  burn  dry  twigs  over 
the  root;  the  plantain  will  then  yield  fruits  as  big  as 
the  trunk  of  the  elephant,  and  the  fruits  will  appear  as  if 
to  tear  out  the  tree. 

lf>.  If  the  root  of  the  plantain  be  drenched  with  the 
blood  or  serum  (of  flesh,)  of  the  bog  or  with  the  decoction  of 
the  fruit  of  the  Ankola,  it  will  bear  pomegranate  fr flits. 


10.  If  the  Rambha  (plan lain)  bo  watered  with  a  li¬ 
quid  mixtu  re  consisting  of  the  flesh,  serum  and  blood  of 
man  an  l  the  powdered  tooth  of  the  elephant  and  water, 
the  tree  will  yield  mango  fruits. 

17.  Mix  together  the  shining  deception  of  the  fruits 
of  Ankola,  human  flesh,  the  milk  of  the  goat  and  oil  cakes. 
Use  the  mixture  as  immure  to  the  seed  of  the  mango  put 
into  the  Soil.  1  ho  seed  will  grow  out  as  p,  spreading  creep¬ 
er  Jike  thy  yum  and  will  bear  fruits  at  nil  times. 


9 


I>RTHAT  SAMHITA. 


Form  a  mixture  of  Ivmniripir,  of  barley,  of  Kr 
nshti,  an<l  of  jaggery;  rub  it  over  any  tree  yielding 
bitter  fruit,  after  slightly  grazing  out  the  bark  with  a 
knife,  pour  at  the  root  a  mixture  of  [milk  and  water  ;  tbo 
tree  will  tIiencefortbi7iel  da  wee  t  fruits. 

19.  Soak  any  seed  many  times  in  human  flesh  and 
in  the  oil  of  the  Ankola,  drying  the  seed  each  time.  Take 
n  quantity  of  earth  in  the  hand,  bury  the  seed  in  it  ami 
pour  water  over  it ;  the  seed  will  grow  that  instant. 

20-  Dig  a  pit,  burn  in  it  the  bones  and  the  dung  of 
the  cow  and  the  hog  ;  remove  the  ashes  ;  fill  the  pit  with 
earth-  Plant  in  it  the  root  of  the  Moolaka ,  the  root 
will  grow  to  the  size  of  the  pit 


Glossary  of  Botanical  terms  occurring  in  the  last  iw® 
Chapter sy  arranged  alphabetically . 


A . 

Amalaka — The  fruit  of  the  Emblio  myrobalan. 

\i  Amra — The  Mango.  Lcimu & 

Amrataka — Hog-pl nra.  Spondias  mangifera.  tutlVuur.  Tel. 

Adivio  mamadie,  Amatum  ;  Beng.  Arana. 

Anjana — probably  Kalanjana— a  small  shrub  nsetl  as  a  pur- 
gative. 

Ankola — Alangium  hexapetalum.  Tel.  Wocdooga  ; 

Hind.  Akola.  The  roots  are  aromatic ;  the  fruit  is  edi¬ 
ble. 

Apamarga — Name  of  a  plant.  Achyranfches  aspera  employ- 
ed  often  in  incantations,  in  medicine,  in  washing  linen 
and  in  sacrifices, 


dttakarilai— Solan nra  Jucquini.  <2 saw m (Si /t) .  Tel.  Van- 


1UU.HAT  SAMI-UTA. 


6 


kula;  Hind.  Kootaya- 

Kapitthu  — The  Elephant  or  Wood  apple.  Feronia  elephantum. 
f^&TfTLCiuw.  Tel.  V elaga ;  Hind.  Khoet.  The  fruit  m  eaten. 

Karan ja — Pongamia  glabra.  li^lduld.  Tel.  Kanooyoo  ;  llind* 
Kurung  ;  Beug.  Kumnjse-  Loives  unequally  pinnated. 

Karavalli — Momordica  ehavantia*  unBp&'uij.  Bong  Ktuula. 

Kuravira — -The  plant  Assafcctkhi. 

Karim — A  cluster  of  shooting  bamboos.  QptM 

Kariviknrft — The  tree  Pterospermum  aceri folium.  Also 
Cassia  fistula.  Q&nw$jj. 

Kasa--~A.  species  of  grass.  S  a  cell  urn  m  sponhmeura.  ®/r 
Bong.  Kush ;  Hind.  Kigara  ;  Tel.  Relloogaddy. 

Kafcaka — The  cleaning  nut  plan t.  Strychnos  potatorum. 
Q «h  Q&trilwt-. . 

Khadira — The  tree  Acacia  catechu.  Having  very  hard  wood. 
Tatgil.  Wbthalay;  Tel.  Podcolmaua ;  Bong.  Khuera. 

Kharjori — The  Wild  Datura  treo.  Qui?*&u>oLb. 

Kovidura — Bauhinia  variegata.  Lo&vujr&$-  Hind.  Soria.  The 
huds  are  eaten  as  vegetables. 

Krimiripu — An  anthelmintic  plant.  Vidanga,  a  shrub  use  l 
in  medicine  as  a  vermifuge. 

Kshura — Tribulus  Lanugiuosus.  Tel.  Palleroo;  Bong. 

Gokhoor. 

Kula — Name  of  several  plants;  a  kind  of  ebony.  Diaopyros 
toroentosa.  Hind.  Tumal. 

Kuranka — A  crimson  species  of  Amaranth. 

Kusa—  Sacred  grass  used  at  certain  religious  ceremonies, 
Poa  Synosuroides.  A  grass  with  long  stalks  and  nume¬ 
rous  pointed  leaves. 


L. 


5'0 


3?  Wl  AT  SAMHITA. 


t 


Lakshumana — Name  of  various  plants,  Oshkdl>JEhJns 
&c. 

Likueha — A  kind  of  bread  fruit  tree,  Artkocarpus  La« 

&u.irQ y>jr. 


■M- 


Madayautika — Arabian  jasmine. 

Madkuka-  Bassia  lot) gi folia  or  latifolia. 

Ippa ;  Hiud.  Mohe.  Its  oil  is  used  by  the  poorer  c 
Madhupushpa — Mahwah  tree.  Bassia  latifolnu  ami® 
mu-  Tel.  Ipie  ;  Bong-  Mahwah  or  Muhova* 

M  ad  h  u  y  ash  ti — Su  garean  o. 

Mashapnrna — A  and  of  leguminous  shrub.  Glycine  cl 
Mokshaka— A  species  of  tree.  l. 

Mounjaka— A  blade  of  Munja  grass,  Saccharum  muiri 

@luLj€Ot 

Mridvika — A  vine,  a  bunch  of  grapes.  $tffrril.&irLDj[rui, 
Mulaka — An  esculent  root;  a  radish.  ( tperr&rm 
Mnrva— Sa nseviera  Roxburghiaua.  Qu^/iba^mLr. 
of  creeper  from  the  fibres  of  which  bow  string* 
the  girdle  of  the  Kshatriyas  are  made. 

Muata—  A  species  of  grass.  Oyperus  rotundus. 

Qu(V}UD  (Lpfi&'X&ir'Sr  „ 


N. 


Naga— Rottlera  tinctoria.  Tel.  Vaauntagunda;  Hind.  ( 

&tS)o}Qu,i  ip.. 

Naktamala — The  tree  Tonga mia  glabra  or  Dalbergia 

rea.  ^hsj^uhtlo. 

ISfala — A  bind  of  fragrant  substance  ;  a  perfume ;  re< 
nic. 

Navamalika — Arabian  Jasmine.  Jasminum  sambal.  g 


Bill  HAT  SAMH1TA. 

0.«rif  mAsSf.  Tel.  Booudoo  Ma 

giah. 

Noepa — The  tree  Nauelea  cadtnnba.  Tel.  Rudrak- 

shakarnba. 

Hiehala—Tbe  tree  Bnmrigtonift  acutangula. 

Niinbft — Azadirachtn  Indies,.  (saaiq. 

Nirgimdi — Vifcex  negundo.  QeusaQitii&@.  Tci.  Wagala  ;  Iliud. 
Nisinda. 

j  Kyagrodhn— The  Indian  fig  tree.  Ficus  Indica. 

O. 

Ooeira — Tho  fragrant  root  of  the  plant  Andropogon  murica- 
tus.  c§&rnJjd''&iAQ<Siiir . 

P. 

Padma — A  species  of  fragrant  plant,  ^itwaur.  fol.  Yerrafca- 
mavay. 

Palasa— The  tree  Butea  froudosa.  qs*.Tel.  Moduga  ,•  Hind. 

Pa  las;  Eng.  Bastard  teak.  Blossoms  rich,  scarlet  color. 
Palasini — A  species  of  climbing  plant,  jsif 'lo, 
Palivata — Name  of  a  tree. 

Pftuasa — The  jack  tree.  Artocarpus  integrifolia-  ueoir. 
Parushaka — Xylocarpas  graoaturn.  Bong.  Parasha, 
peelu-  -Salvador*  Persioa.  Tel.  Ghoonia. 

Pindara— A  species  of.  tree.  Flacourtia  sapida.  Tamil,  Sot- 
tacla ;  Tel.  Comew. 

Plnksha— -The  holy  flg  tree.  Ficus  religiose.  se»QmJHa>!nb. 
J’unna'm — Rottleria  tinctoria,  from  the  blossoms  of  which 

O 

n  yellowish  dve  is  prepared. 

R. 

Raj akoSataka—  A  kind  of  fruit. 

Rambha— A  plantain,  Musa  sapientum. 

S. 

Baka  -Pot  herb-  Sirisha  tree- 


<SL 

;  Beng.  Bulmoo 


72 


1UIIHA.T  fc'AMHTTA. 


Simu— Acacia  Btmia*  possessing.  a  very  rotigi 
wood  sin  posed  to  contain  fire.  &/&■- gMiduld, 
Soptaparna— The  tree  Alstonia  or  Eolrites  scbok 
feet  Flowers  greenish  white  Planks  used  a 
boards.  ^0kouun%o.  Bong.  Cb&tixB, 

Baribn — tfevT^tflQojir.  Sarsaparilla. 

Knrja — The  sal  tree.  Shorea  robusta.  mega 5. 

Sj  tarmtra — Lotus,  Nelumbium  speciosum .  <$fru.(zw, 
Si  ms  a  pa — The  tree  Paibergia  Sisn.  ^Q&msLcjjLo. 
Sinduvara — fl  be  small  tree  or  shrub  Negundo,  ©4j« 
Sivnsha— Sirissa  tree  Acacia  speciosa.  Flowers  sma 
and  fragrant,  wnema.  Tel.  Dirisana;  Bong,  Sirh 
Smimari — The  plant  Nauc.lea  cordifolia. 

Siva — The  Sami  tree.  Yellow  Myrobolan.  40Q/s^4 
Bcrnala-ta-Tho  moon  plant.  Sarcosterna  viminalis. 
Son ak a  — *  B  i  g  no  n  7 a  or  Calosanfchoa  Indica.  A  In 
looking  tree.  The  timber  is  soft  and  spongy, 
leaves  are  used  in  the  treatment  of  ulcers,  eu 
Tel.  Pampena;  11  inch  Shyona. 

Siveparni — A  lotus  or  the  tree  Premna  spin 09a.  Th 
of  which  produces  fire  by  attrition.  Ou0*r@£4/^ 
Tel .  T a goontOoda . 

Sukarnpudee—  Sukura  is  a  sort  of  moss.  Lyeopodiun 
on  turn. 

Sukarikn — A  sort  of  moss.  Do. 

Suriuvhlli — Cleome  pentaphyllns,  which,  according 
freVj  is  i'ynandropsis.  OQjlx^d^Gnu. 

Suvarna — The  ireo  Cassia  fistula.  The  thorn  apple. 

fr  BlO  Q  lD. 

S  \  amn — Icbnocarpus  frufcescens,  used  as  a  substi 
£  a  -sa  par  iljjn *  & 


Tb 


Tala -“The  •pahnyra  or  fan  palm-  Bora  asms  fkibeil 


Bftnr.iT  aAsniiTA. 


iftcles  and  with  apartments  in  upper  stories ;  it  consists 
b  stories  and  is  26  cubits  broad. 

.28.  Simtm  is  twelve-sided  anti  8  cubits  broad  contain* 
ifig  the  figure  of  tbe- lion*  The  four  remaining  structures 
are  of  black  color  ;  of  these  four,  Ohttktiasni  lias  5  Anil. 

20.  The  height  of  a  story  shall  bo  108  inches  and  3 1 
cubits  according  to  what  waft'  stated '  by  Viswakarm^ to 
Maya. 

o0.  In  tho  opinion  of  persons  learned  in  the  science  of 
tompto  building1,  a  temple  furnished  with,  pigeon  holes  is 
deemed  perfect  though  it  might  contain  defects. 

31.  In  this  Chapter/I  have  briefly  described  all  that 
lias  been  stated  by  G-arga,  arid  my  attempt  has  also  been 
to  summarise  tho  wide  accounts  given  by  Manu  and  other 
Bishia  on  tho  subject  of  Temple  Building. 


CHAPTER  X.  (57.) 

ON'  DriBAittB  CUMENTS. 

1  &  2.  Put  into  a  droua  of  water  tho  raw  loaves  of 
the  Trad  uka  and  of  the  Kapitha,  the  flowers  of  the  Salmali, 
tho  seeds  of  the  Sallaki  (a),  the  bark  of  the  Dhanvana  (},}, 
aud\i  small  quantitykof  Vaohaj  heat  the  water  on  fire  till  io 
is  reduced  to  oue-eighth  of  its  original  quantity.  Itemovo 
the  jar  from  fire, 

3.  Put  into  the  leal ka  thos  prepared  Gulgulufc)  aud 
tho  juice  of  the  SroevasakapG  and  of  Sarja  and  Bhallata, 
Ivundnruka(o)  and  the  fruit  of  the  Aust  and  of  Hdya. 
i  he  coment  thus  formed  is  known  as  "Vajraiepa. 

•t.  In  the  construction  of  temples  and  of  the  palaces  of 


(a). 

G). 


(<■). 

m. 


Su,l!?ki  Th«  Gum  olitnnuin  tree,  BoswelUa  Tbwifera.  Bon* 
Hi  nd.  bn  ban. 

Dlianw.na  :  Tba  plant  Alkagi  Jtaarorum.  Eng.  Hebrew  Manila, 
Hina.  Juwasa, 

Galgulu  ;  Bdellium.  <ysi£'iQuu}. 

fl  ii€,  juice  ol  tho  Sreevaaaku  :  turpentine. 

Kuntluruka  :  Tho  rosin  ol*  tho  plant  Bo/wcliia  Thu ri fora. 


78 


BUt HAT  SAMIUTA. 


m  1M 

king?*  of  turrets,  and  in  fixing  the  Linga  ox  tao  image 
temple,  in  the  construction  of  walls  and  wells,  it  the 
table  cement  above  referred  to,  be 
structures  w i  1 1 1  as t  for  a  cgpre  of  years> 

5  &  6.  Form  a  mixfc  uro  ©f  sheHac,  the  res 
the  plant  Boswellia  thurifera,  Bdellium,  soot  in  the  c< 
of  houses,  the  fleshy  part  of  the  fruit  of  Kapitha  a 
Bilva,  the  fruit  of  tho  NugabalafdO,  Madhuka  and 
jisbta,  the  juice  of  the  Sarja  as  well  as  vinegar  mad 
fmifc,  and  put  it  in  a  jar  of  water,  heat  it  till  it  is  re 
to  an  eighth  of  its  bulk  ;  the  resulting  kalka  is  also  I 
as  Yajralepa  and  is  an  excellent  one  and  can  bo  m 
the  several  purposes  already  mentioned. 

7.  Form  a  mixture  of  the  horns  of  the  cow,  tl 
falo,  and  the  goat  reduced  to  powder,  the  hair  of  tl 
the  skin  of  the  buffalo,  the  milk  of  the  cow  and  th 
of  the  Nimba  and  the  Kapittha  trees  :  throw  the  mix 
a  jar  of  water  and  heat  it,  the  resulting  kalka  is  a! 
excellent  animal  cement. 

&  Molt  together  eight  parts  of  lead,  two  ps 
bronze,  and  one  part  of  brass;  the  result  will  bo  a 
metallic  cement.  This  is  according  to  Maya. 


CHAPTER  XL  (58.) 

On  Tehclr  Images. 

1.  The  fine  particles  moving  in  the  rays  of  t 
coming  into  a  room  through  the  window  opening  are 
as  atoms  Is  not  tho  atom  tho  first  of  all  measureme* 

2,  Eight  atoms  make  an  hair’s  end  ,*  eight  hah 
make  a  nit  ,*  eight  nits  make  a  louse  ;  eight  lice  n 
barley  seed  ;  eight  barley  seeds  make  an  inch,  wl: 
known  as  a  unit  of  measure. 

(a),  Nagabala  :  Tho  plant  Uraria  LflgopodiOide*. 


!UU  MAT  SAMHITA. 


ia — The  soap  berry  tree ;  Sapipdua  detergent ;  Aaa 
^ jJiraohfca  Indica.  Q&uuwirih  or 
Arjuna — The  tree  Terminalia  Arjuna.  lo@@u>itld, 

Arka — Name  of  the  plant  Gaiotropis  gigantea. 

Asmantaka — Name  of  a  plant  from  the  fibres  of  which  a 
Brahmin’s  girdle  tufty  be  made,  probably  Indian  hemp 
&em£o. 

Asoka — Name  of  the  tree  Jonesia  Asoka*  «gyG ^nsu>jrw* 
Aspota — Calatropis  gigantea.  <>r0i0. 

Aswakarna — The  tree  Vatica  robusta.  u)&(rc&nQw&r®p 


IDJTLD' 


Atibala — Name  of  a  medicinal  plant,  Sidonia  covdifolia 
and  Bhombifolia’or  Annona  squarmosa.  Custard  apple. 
Atimukta — Name  of  a  tree  Dalbergia  Ougeinensis,  0©* 


B. 

|  Badari— The  Jujube  tree,  Zyzyphus  jujuha.  gfraimfi*  Tel. 

Hey  goo ;  Bang  Kool.  Flowors  greenish,  yellow  and  fruit 
eatable.  It  is  sweet  and  mealy. 

Beejapura — A  -variety  of  citron.  (^tbcoilL^wir^'ir. 

Bhallata — Marldngnut  plant.  Q&rixiG>anL.<stoL~. 

Bharngi — 

Bilva — yEgle  marmelos,  tho  Bell  tree  or  the  W  ood~applc.  Its 
leaves  arc  employed  iu  the  ceremonial  of  tho  worship 
of  Piva.  gSImgiiijdjilo*  Tel.  Maredoo;  Bong.  Bell* 

a 

Cliatra— Namo  of  a  kind  of  grass.  Name  of  a  plant,  Ani- 
thum  sowa.  Tel.  Soinpa. 

D, 

\ 

\  Dadima — Pomegranate.  nj/rjiy&rr. 

Danti — The  plant  Croton  polyandrum  nsrrapfS.  Tel.  Konda- 


Bill  EAT  S&mxvA, 


i 

Atmidam;  Berg*  Dimfceo,-  Hind,  Hakoose.  The 
are  lined  a  purgative* 

.^Iiatri — Ernblura  oliiciiialis.  Q/iwoe5)a)i?J^. 

IJImva  The  plant  Cri.sioa  tomentosa.  Tel. 

Dliaee-phool.  0&/<s?rGW<si>  ? 

.Ili’&rksJha — *V  1  no.  Q&uup  Qp  ‘bp Jrfi , 


G, 

Ga v.u d a  v ega^*Na m o  of  a  plant. 

(>ud iiclii  —  The  KhrnbCoftculus  cordifolins.  ff.i $*0*^,  Ti  l. 

i  i  p  [ .)  a  tin  gv  i  y ;  B  o  n  g .  G  ul  uric  h  a .  This  in  a  twining  shr  u  b , 
(tundra  A  kind  of  gims.  Saccharnm  Sara,  pen-reed  grass. 
(?a/6yr/74©*L/51.  Bong*  Shu r  or  Sure, 


IT. 

Huridra — *1  urhvoiTc*  . 

t 

J  ]bli a -Probably  Ibhakesarn.  The  tree  Mesua  Koxburghii 
or  Ibhakaua.  The  plant  Scindapsus  officinalis.  jgSmfiu 
iSlsQ. 

India  taru  The  treo  .Pinas  Dovataru.  Q&ibij^&6is)&-Lcriib> 

J. 

.(ambn—Syzygium  Jarabol  Jannra.  me»&.  Tel.  Nnreddoo  ; 
Hind.  Jatnoon-  The  fruit  is  eatable.  Flowers  small, 
white. 

JyotisUm&ti* — Heart  pea.  Card  i  sip  ermtim  helicacabum.  a//r 

&2j  #s)a/ .  &r , 

K. 


Xadatnha — The  tree  Nauolea  Kadaniba.  Flowers  small, 
organ e.  colored  and  fragrant*  ’Tel,  Ru- 

drakshakoiubn  ;  Betig.  Kitdam ;  Hind.  Cuddmn. 

Kakod u n ibarika —  Opposito  leaved  fig  treo.  Ficus  opposite 
folia.  Qu&i$$}- 

Kakublri — The  tree  Terininalia  Arjuna, 


r.TUTUT  SAMIfU'A, 


<§L 


ucsiT.  Tel  Tady';  Hind.  Talgachh. 
is  extracted  from  the  tree; 


Liquor  called  toddy 


Tilatca — The  red  wood  tree.  Adonanthera  Pavonijm.  to^mfr 
or  4$ £ 0 m $ lo .  Tel.  Bancligooroo  vindza  , 
Hind.  Jvooclmmluna. 

Tirmr&~  A  sort  of  aquatic  plant. 

Tlnduka— Dyo^pyros  erabryopteris  or  Byoapyros  glutinoarr 

Trivrita — A  creeping  medicinal  plant;  a  substitute  for 
jalap, 

, ,  u.  ;  ,*  (!; 

Udmrl^ar.i— -Ficus  racomosa.  .^ifinc/ru  .  Tel-  Mnydi  ;  Hind. 
Cooler.  Bed  wooded  fig  tree  or  country  fig  tree.  Tbo 
fruit  is  edible.  , 

Usira  J.he  fragrant  root  of  the  plant  Andropogon  nuirica- 
tus.  Q®nly.(*cur.  Tel,  GWsavoo  ;  Bong.  K  husk  us. 

'  v.  .  ,  *  "  :  1 " 


Vakula — A  kind  of  tree*  Mimusop  olengi.  mQtpLGpib, 
Variira— A  sort  of  cane  or  ratang.  Cal  am  ns  rotatig. 

*V  anjola  —  Joucsia  Asoka.  *&i*&irjswiru)  or  J$)sdl&L£jr Co, 
Varahi—A  particular  kind  of  bulbous  plant  said  to  bo  an 
esculent  root  or  yam.  um&rf!QwL~. >;  <3 & m jr. 

Yarnna— Evasia  longifolia.  Q mss>&. 

YaAik a — Cdh afcoda  vasi k a.  Q^noaa l.„, 

Vata— The  banyan  or  Indian  fig  tree.  Ficus  Indies.  „$.eo uuru- 
Veerana^A7ragrani>  grass.  Cnsons  grass.  Tel, 


Cooroovayroo  or  Kussaroo  >  Beng.  Klmskus  ;  Hind. 

•  Usee  r.  The  root  is  frag  rant.  , 

Vetasa  -Calamus  rotang.  Rafctap  cane.  cu&®.  fell  Betfcara ; 
Hind.  Beta.  Sometimes  the  growth  is  to  tbo  length  of 
500  or  000  feet. 

ViblntakA— The  tree  Term  in  alia  .  Belerica.  njjusjrih. 

Tel.  Taondeo  or  Tady  ;  Bc»g.  Bahura-  Length  100 
feet.  A  medicinal  tree. 


10 


BRIilAT  SAMIHTA. 

paniculata,  A  medicinal  snbslmice 
derod  of  great  efficacy  a  i  a  vonnifugo.  ®/irujeS}c\TrihJULb. 
Yidari — The  plant  Hedysnrurn  gangeticum.  The  climbing 
plant  Ipomoea  parueulata. 

Virudhi — A  spreading  creeper. 

Vy&glirapada — The  plant  Flacourtia  sapida. 


CHAPTER  IX,  (56.) 

On  th  e  Building  of  Temples* 

L  After  procuring  an  abundant  supply  of  water,  and 
forming  gardens  round  it,  there  shall  be  erected  on  the  spot 
temples  for  Devas  for  the  increase  of  one’s  fame  and  virtue. 

2.  The  person  who  desires  to  go  to  worlds  to  which 
go  poisons  who  perform  sacrificial  fire  ceremonies  and  dig 
water  tanks,  shall  erect  temples  for  the  Devas.  He  prospers 
both  in  this  world  and  in  tho  world  above. 

3'  Places  where  there  are  waters  and  gardens,  whe¬ 
ther  natural  or  artificial  are  dwelt  by  the  Devas* 

4.  Tho  Devas  are  ever  at  piny  in  tanks  made  shady 
by  tho  leaves  of  the  lotus  and  white  by  the  water-lilies 
moved  to  and  fro  by  the  wings  of  the  swan  ,* 

5.  In  tanks  rendered  agreeable  by  the  music  of  tho 
awan,  the  dock,  tho  curlew  and  tho  ruddy-goose  and  by  tho 
water  animals,  resting  in  tho  shade  of  the  hijja!  growing  on 
the  banks  ; 

6.  la  places  where  there  arc  rivers  adorned  by  lines 
of  curlew  birds  serving  as  a  girdle  with  beads,  full  of  the 
sweet  music  of  the  teal  with  tho  watery  sheet  for  robes  and 
with  the  ilisha'fish  for  belts  ; 

7.  In  places  where  there  are  rivers  with  blossomed 
treeu  on  their  banks  for  their  head  ornaments,  with  tho 
junction  of  tho  streams  as  their  loins,  tlio  sandbanks  as 


«<SL 

consb 


BRIHAT  SAMHXTA. 


mv  breasts  and  with  the  sounding  swans’  as  their  ankle 
beads  •, 

8.  And  in  gardens,  streams,  bills,  planes  through  which 
pass  mountain  currents  and  in  the  canals  of  (lower  gardens. 

9.  Places  which  have  been  described  ns  suitable  for 
the  erection  of  houses  for  tho  Brahmins  and  others  are  also 
suitable  for  the  erection  of  temples. 


<§L 


10.  In  tho  case  of  temples  tho  site  shall  always  bo 
divided  into  64  squares  and  the  entrance  shall  be  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  wall  and  the  walls  shall  be  due  east  and  wost 
and  due  north  aud  south. 


11.  The  height  of  tho  temple  shall  be  twice  its  breadth 
and  its  hath  shall  bo  a  third  of  its  height. 

12.  The  Garbliagraba  or  the  inner  apartment  shall  bo 
half  as  broad  as  the  breadth  of  the  temple  and  walls  .shall  be 
raised  all  round.  The  breadth  of  tho  entrance  to  the  Gar- 
bhagraha  shall  be  a  fonrth  of  the  breadth  of  the  room  and 
its  height  shall  be  twice  the  breadth. 

13.  The  breadth  of  tho  two  vortical  side  frames  as 
well  as  of  the  two  horizontal  frames  above  and  below  shall 
be  a  fourth  of  tho  height  of  tho  entrance,  and  the  thickness 
of  the  vertical  frames  shall  be  a  fourth  of  tho  breadth  of  tho 
entrance. 

14.  The  number  of  vertical  frames  of  the  door  of  tho 
entrance  may  be  3,  5,  7  or  9,  aud  two  small  opetiingfyjhaU 
be  made  at  one-fourth  of  the  height  of  the  door  from  (Mow- 

15.  The  other  parts  shall'  bo  adorned  with  the  figures 
of  birds,  trees  and  pots,  and  with  male  and  female  figures 
as  well  as  those  of  loaves,  creepers  and  of  tho  heads  attend* 
iug  on  Siva. 

16.  The  height  of  tho  image  of  tho  Dow  with  its 


Hill  H  AT  SAMHITA. 


estal  shall  be  ^ths  of  the  height  of  the  en trance.  The 
image  shall  be  double  the  height  of  the  pedestal. 

17  &  IS*  Twenty  different  sorts  of  temples  are  re¬ 
ferred  to  by  writers.  These  are  Mern,  Man  dan ,  Kailasa, 
V imana-Qhhatidii,  Nandana,  Samtid ga ,  P&dma,  Garuda, 
Nundivardhana,  Kanjaru,  Guhurajtt,  '  Vrisha,  Ih.msa,  Sarva* 
tobhadra,  Ghat  a,  Sirnha,  Vritta/  Chatushkona,  Shodasasroe 
and  Ashtasree. 


ID..  I  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  each  of  the  twenty 
sorts  of  temples. 

20.  The  building  known  Meru  consists  of  six  sides, 
twelve  stork,  with  numerous  caves  and  with  four  entrances 
and  shall  be  thirty-two  cubits  long* 

2  b  Tlio  building  known  as  Mandara  is  thirty  cubits 
broad  and  oonsists  of  ten  stories  with  pinnacles.  The  build¬ 
ing  known  as  Kailasa  is  twenty  cubits  long  and  consists  of 
eight  stories  with  piiiimelec* 

22.  V'imana  is  twenty-one  cubits  long  with  windows 
and  air  holes.  Nandaria  lias  six  stories,  is  thirty-twu  cubits 
long  and  has  sixteen  And  as  (domes  ?). 

23.  Samudga  is  round;  Padma  is  of  the  shape  of  a 
lotus,  8  cubits  long  with  a  single  story  and  pinnacle. 

24.  Garuda  is  of  the  shape  of  the  Brali  many  kite  ; 
Nandi vardhana  is  24  cubits  broad  with  seven  stories  and 
twenty  An  das, 

.  Kur.jara  is  of  the  shape  of  the  back  of  the  ele- 
pbanPlvith  four  sides,  each  16  cubits  broad.  Guharaja  is 
16  cubits  long  and  has  3  stories  with  verandas. 

26.  Yrisha  is  12  cubits  broad,  round  on  all  sido3  with  a 
single  story  and  pinnacle.  Harnsa  is  of  tho  shape  of  the 
swan.  Ghata  is  8  cubits  broad  and  is  of  the  shape  of  a  pot. 

27.  Sarvatobhadra  has  four  entrances  with  numerous 


BHTHAT  SA  HHTTA- 


<8L 


3.  Tfre  height  of  the  pedestal  of  an  image  shall  bo 
one-third  of  seven-eighths  of  the  height  of  the  entrance. 
The  height  of  the  imago  shall  bo  twice  the  height  ft  the 
pedestal* 

4.  The  breadth  and  length  of  tho  face  of  the  image 
shall  each  be  12  inch o.c  The  sage  Nagnagit  says  flint  in 
the  Dravida  country  the  face  of  the  imago  is  14  inches 
long. 


T>.  The  nose,  tho  forehead,  the  chin,  the  neck,  and 
the  ear  of  the  image  shall  each  bo  4  inches;  tho  mouth 
shall  be  2  inches  ;  tho  breadth  of  the  chin  shall  also  be  2 
inches. 

6.  The  forehead  shall  bo  8  inches  long  ;  2  inches 
from  it  are  the  frontal  bones  which  shall  be  4  inches,  and 
the  ear  shall  be  2  inches  broad. 

7-  The  space  between  tho  ear  and  the  eyebrows 
shall  be  four  inches  arid  a  half  and  tho  lobes  of  tho  ear 
shall  be  well  formed* 


8.  According  to  Vasishtba  the  interval  between  tho 
end  of  the  pye  and  tho  ear  shall  be  4  inches  ;  tho  lower  lip 
shall  bo  an  inch  broad  and  the  upper  one  shall  bo  one-half 
the  size  of  the  lower. 


9*  The  Goeclm(p)  shall  bo  half  an  inch;  the  month 
shall  be  4  inches  long;  the  breadth  of  the  mouth  when 
open  shall  be  3  incheSj  and  the  opening  shall  be  an  inch 
and  a  half. 

10.  The  nose  shall  bo  two  inches  broad ;  the  sense  of 
smell  is  at  the  tip  of  the  nose ;  the  nose  shall  be  two 
inches  high  ;  the  interval  between  the  eye  and  tho  tip  of 
the  nose  shall  be  four  inches. 


31*  The  eyo-lid  shall  be  two  inches  broad;  the  eye¬ 
ball  shall  also  be  two  inches  broad  ;  the  breadth  of  the  pit- 


BKIHAT  SiAfHTTA. 


[err. 


tho  oyo  fl-al!  be  two- third#  of  nit  inch.  Tim  eyelids 
aboil  be  open  with  u  Bpaco  of  half  an  inch*  The  centre  of 
the  pupil  of  the  eye  where  the  sense  of  sight  remains  shall 
bo  one-fifth  of  two-thirds  of  an  inch. 

32.  Prom  one  end  of  n»  eyebrow  to  the  other  end 
of  the  other  eyebrow  shall  be  ten  inches.  Tin?  breadth 
of  the  ove-bTOW  shall  behalf  an  inch.  The  interval  between 
the  eyebrows  shall  be  two  inches;  and  the  length  of  each 
eyebrow* shall  ba  fear  inches. 

33.  The  breadth  of  the  hair  of  the  eyebrows  shall  be 
half  an  inch  throughout ;  nt  tho  end  of  the  eye  shall  be 
formed  the  figure  of  the  ICaraylra  flower  about  an  inch  in 
dimensions. 

)4.  Tho  breadth  of  tho  head  shall  be  82  inches  ;  tho 
same  when  measured  across  shall  be  24  inches.  In  paint* 
in  or  12  out  of  tho  82  inches  shall  be  visible,  arid  the  rest 
shall  bo  invisible. 

lb.  Tho  face  with  (be  hair  glowing  about  it  shall  bo 
16  inches  according  to  .Nagnagit ;  tho  nock  shall  bo  JO 
inches  broad  ;  the  same  when  measured  around  shall  be  21 


inches. 


16.  The  heart  shall  be  12  inches  below  tho  neck;  the 
navel  shall  ba  12  inches  below  the  heart,  smd  tho  genital 
organ  shall  be  12  inches  below  the  centre  of  the  navel. 


17.  The  thighs  shall  bo  24  inches  long;  the  shanks 


shall  also  be  24  inches  ;  the  knee-shell  shall  be  4  inches, 
and  the  feet  shall  be  4  inches  high. 

18.  The  length  of  the  feet  shall  be  12  inches  and  the 
breadth  shall  bo  (!  inches  ;  the  length  of  big  (oe  shall  be  •> 
inches  ;  the  same  when  measured  around  shall  be  5  inches  ; 
the  next  too  shall  also  ba  3  inches. 

39.  The  other  three  toes  shall  each  be  one-eighth 
Jess  than  the  length  of  the  toe  before  it.  The  height  of 
the  big  toe  shall  be  an  inch  and  a  quarter. 


mtkat  samkita* 

The  learned  that  the  nail  of  lit©  big  tocT 
be  three-foui’fihs  of  an  inch  broad  and  that  the  toe- 
nails  shall  each  be  half  an  inch  or  less, 

21.  The  shanks  when  measured  around  at  the  end 
shall  be  1+  inches*  The  breadth  at  the  place  shall  bo  5 
inches.  The  breadth  of^tbo  shanks^  at  the  middle  shall 
be  7  inches;  the  shanks  when  measured  around  at  the 
middle  shall  be  27  inches, 


22.  The^knee  shall  be  8  inches  bread  at  the  middle  , 
the  leneo  when  measured'amind  at  the  middle  shall  be  24 
inches.  The  breadth  of  the  thigh  at  the  middle  shall  bo 
14  inches  j  the  samo  when  measured  around  at  the  middle 
shall  be  28  inches. 

23-  The  hip  shall  be  18  inches  broad;  the  same 
when  measured  around  shall  be  44  inches,  The  navel 
shall  be  an  inch  deep. 


24.  The  measure  of  the  body  round  fch.6  middle  of 
the  navel  shall  bo**  42  inches.  The  interval  between  the 
two  nipples  of  the  breast  shall  bo  10  inches  and  the  arm¬ 
pit  shall  be  at  a  distance  of  6  inches  from  the  nipple. 

25.  The  shoulders  shalfbe  8  inches  long  ;  the  upper 
arm  shall  be  12  inches  long;  the  lower  arm  shall  bed 
inches  and  the  wrist  shall  be  4  inches. 


26  The  upper  arm  when  measured  around  at  its  root 
shall  bo  18  inches  and  the  lower  arm  when  measured  around 
at  the  wrist  shall  bo  12  inches.  The  breadth  of  the  palm 
shall  be  6  inches  and  its  length  shall  be  7  inches. 

27.  The  middle  finger  shall  be  5  inches  long ;  the 
forefore-finger  shall  be  shorter  than  the  middle  finger  by  one 
half  of  the  length  of  its  middle- joint  ;  the  length  of  thu 
ling  finger  shall  bo  the  Same  a$  that  of  the  fore-finger* 

II 


LC 


SRIHAT  SAMHITA. 

the  little  finger  shall  bo  shorter  than  the  middle  linger 
by  its  last  joint. 

28.  The  thumb  shall  consist  of  two  joints,  and  the  other 
fingers  of  three  joints  each.  The  breadth  of  the  nails  shall  be 
ono  half  of  the  length  of  the  joints  on  which  they  grow. 

20.  The  images  shall  be  shaped  and  adorned  according 
to  the  fashion  of  the  country.  By  placing  'mages  in  temples 
a  person  becomes  prosperous. 

30  The  images  of  Rama,  the  son  of  Daseivitfcha  aud  of 
Bali,  the  spn  of  Viroohana,  shall  each  be  120  inches  high. 
The  Dev  as  of  middle  importance  shall  be  108  inches  high 
mid  the  inferior  Devas  shall  be  96  inches  high. 

31.  The  imago  of  Bhaga van  Vishnu  shall  have  either 
8  hands  or  4  hands  or  2  hands  ;  there  shall  be  a  mole  at  tlio 
breast  known  as  Sreevntsa  ;  aud  the  figure  shall  be  re  pro, 
gen  ted  to  wear  at  the  breast  the  gem  known  as  Koustubha. 

32-  The  body  shall  be  of  the  color  of  the  Atasi 
flower  )  the  cloth  shall  be  of  yellow  color  ■,  the  countenanco 
cheerful,  and  the  image  shall  be  made  to  wear  pendants  and 
crowns.  The  neck,  tbs  breast,  the  shoulders  and  the  arm 
shall  be  large. 

33.  Three  of  the  right  hands  shall  hold  a  sword,  a 
stick  and  an  arrow,  and  the  fourth  hand  shall  appear  stretch* 
ed  and  held  vertically^).  The  four  left  hands  shall 
bold  the  bow,  the  target,  the  discus  and  the  conch  shell. 

3t.  If  the  image  of  Vishnu  be  made  with  only  four 
hands,  one  of  the  two  right  hands  shall  hold  the  stick  and 
the  other  shall  be  raised  as  an  abbaya-basta.  Of  the  two 
left  hands,  one  shall  hold  the  conch-shell  and  the  other  the 
d  iscus. 

35.  If  the  image  be  made  with  only  two  hands,  the 


~  £o.)  This  position  of  the  liand  is  kn<mn  as  abhaya.liasta— telling  men 


hand  shall  bo  raised  up  as  an  abhaya-bosta  and  tho 
left  shall  hold  the  conch-shell,  lie  who  desires  prosperity 
shall  make  an  image  of  Vishnu  as  stated  above. 


3G.  The  imago  of  Bala-dova  shall  be  made  with  a 
plough  in  one  hand,  with  eyes  dim  through  pride,  with  a 
pendant  and  a  body  white  like  eonch-shelh  moon  and  tho 
stem  of  the  lotus. 

37-  Between  the  images  of  Bala-deva  and  Krishna 
(Vishnu)  shall  bo  placed  tho  image  of  a  beautiful  woman 
with  her  left  hand  in  her  middle  and  with  a  lotus  in  her 
right  hand. 

38.  If  the  figure  be  made  with  four  hands,  the  two 
left  hands  shall  hold  tho  lotus  and  a  book  and  ono  of  tho 
right  hands  shall  bo  shaped  as  a  Varada-hasta  (#)  and  tho 
other  hand  shall  hold  a  rosary  of  crystal  beads. 

39.  If  tho  figure  be  made  with  eight  hands,  tho  four 
left  hands  shall  hold  the  water  bowl,  the  bow,  tho  lotus., 
and  a  book ;  and  of  the  four  right  hands,  one  shall  be  made 
into  a  Varada-hasta  and  the  other  three  shall  hold  tho 
arrow,  the  mirror  and  crystal  heads. 

40.  The  image  of  Samba  (son  of  Balarama)  shall  bo 
made  with  a  stick  in  one  hand  ;  and  that  of  Pradyumua  (son 
of  Kristina)  with  a  bow  in  his  hand  ;  the  images  of  tho 
wives  of  these  shall  be  made  each  with  a  sword  in  onehand^ 
a  target  in  tho  other. 

41.  The  image  of  Brahma  shall  be  made  as  seated  in 
a  lotus  with  a  water  jnr  in  one  hand  and  with  four  faces. 
The  image  of  Subbramania  shall  be  made  to  appear  young 
with  tho  weapon  known  as  Sakti.  in  his  band,  and  as  mount¬ 
ed  on  a  peacock* 

42.  The  imago  of  Indra  shall  bo  mounted  on  a  white 

(a)  Varada-hasta :  as  if  granting  the  worshippers  their  wishes — tho 
hand  is  made  to  hang  down  with  tho  palm  towards  the  worshipper  and  tho 
Ungers  slightly  bent  up. 


JJ  tit  HAT  SAM  UI'fA  , 


[c 


(si. 


"with  four  tusks  and  with  the  weapon  known  as 
V&jrayadbu  in  his  hand  ;  there  shall  he  a  third  eye  in  tka 
forehead  of  the  figure. 

43. 


The  image  of  Siva  shall  be  made  with  the  fignra 
of  the  Moon  in  his  head  as  it  appears  in  the  third  lunar  day 
after  the  New-moon,  as  mounted  on  a  bull  with  a  third  eye 
O  his  forehead,  with  the  trident  in  one  hand  and  a  bow 
known  as  Pinaka  in  the  other.  The  left  half  of  the  image 
niay  be  made  of  half  the  body  of  Parvati,  Siva’s  wife. 

U\  Tka  imago  of  Budba  shall  bo  made  as  seated  in  a 
iotus  with  the  hands  and  feet  marked  with  the  figure  of 
the  lotus,  with  a  cheerful  countenance  and  with  short  hair. 

45  \  The  imago  of  the  God  of  the  Arhats  shall  be 
made  with  hands  hanging  down  to  the  knees  with  the  mole 
known  as  Sreevatsa  in  bis  breast,  with  a  placid  look  and  as 
naked,  young  and  beautiful. 

46.  In  the  image  of  the  Sun,  the  nose,  the  forehead, 
the  shanks,  the  thighs,  the  cheeks  and  the  breast  shall  he 
«rge.  in  adorning  the  image,  the  method  followed  in  the 
northern  countries  shall  be  followed.  From  breast  to  tho 
feefc  shall  appear  covered, 

47.  The  aim  shall  be  represented  as  holding  a  lotus  in 

,  .  as  wmtiaS  a  and  pendants,  with  garlands 

hanging  from  Ins  neck  and  as  surrounded  by  Doyas. 

4>-  fne  face  shall  be  bright  as  the  lotus.  The  body 
shall  be  covered  with  stitched  coats;  the  countenance  shall 
be  cheerful  and  the  lustre  of  the  gems  shall  add  beauty  to 

L  10  una^e'  w^°  dxea  in  a  temple  an  image  of  the  Sun 
of  the  above  description  will  enjoy  prosperity. ' 

.  49.  An  imago  only  a  cubit  high  is  good;  one  2  cubits 

long  will  bring  ou  wealth  ;  and  if  the  height  bo  3  or  4  cubits 

tlioro  wi:i  bo  plenty  and  prosperity, 

o0  K  tiie  *IUft£°  Jjas  extra  organ  the  master  will 


Dlil  HAT  S/VUHITA. 

fiom  kings;  if  it  be  one  of  (Infective  organa,  fcbo 
blaster  will  finfter  $rom  diseases  ;  if  the  holly  bo  depressed, 
there  will  bo  suffering  from  hunger,  ivntl  if  the  figure  appear 
thin  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth. 

51.  If  the  image  bo  wounded,  the  master  will  die  by 
Weapons  ;  if  the  loffc  side  of  the  image  bo  bent,  the  master’s 
Wife  will  suffer,  ami  if  the  right  side  bo  bent,  the  master 
will  meet  with  early  death. 

52.  If  the  eyes  of  thei  mage  look  upwards,  the  master 
Will  become  blind,  and  if  the  eyes  look  downwards,  the  mas¬ 
ter  will  suffer  from  anxieties  of  mind.  These  remarks  apply 
as  well  to  tho  images  of  tho  otlior  Devas  na  to  that  of  the 
Sun. 

53.  Tho  height  of  tho  Linga  shall  be  equal  to  the 
length  of  tho  circumference ;  the  lower  one-t  hird  of  the  Linga 
shall  bo  four-sided,  the  central  third  shall  be  eight-aided, 
and  the  upper  third  shall  be  round. 


54  The  lower  part  of  the  Linga  shall  bo  planted  into 
tho  ground,  the  middle  part  shall  bo  made  to  fit  the  hole  in 
the  pedestal  The  breadth  of  tho  pedestal  all  round  tho  hole 
shall  be  of  the  length  of  the  portion  of  tho  Linga  above. 

55.  If  the  Linga  be  thi  n  and  tactile  country  will  perish  * 
if  a  side  be  defective,  towns  will  perish  ;  and  there  will  be 
suffering  if  there  be  any  wound  in  the  head  of  the  Linga. 

56.  The  images  of  tho  mother  deities  ah  all  also  bo 
made  after  the  manner  of  the  country  and  agreeably  to 
their  names.  The  imago  of  Bevunta  (son  of  Surva)  shall 
be  represented  ns  mounted  on  a  horse  and  as  surrounded  by 
a  party  of  hunters. 

57.  The  image  of  Yam  a  (God  of  death)  shall  bo 
mounted  on  a  buffalo  and  as  holding  a  club  in  hh  hand. 
The  image  of  Varuna  shall  hold  a  rope  in  his  hand  and  bo 


#  wh*. 


<SL 


BRiflAT  SAMHH’A.  [Ctl- 

1 '.' .  r. 

^olintod  on  a  swan.  Tho  image  of  Knbera  shall  be  repre¬ 
sented  as  being  borne  by  men,  with  a  large  belly  and  wear¬ 
ing  a  beautiful  crown. 

Tho  image  of  Ganesa  shall  be  represented  with  the  face 
of  the  elephant,  with  a  hanging  belly,  with  an  axo  in  his 
hand,  with  a  single  tusk,  and  with  the  root  of  the  Mulaka 
with  its  black  leaves. 


CHAPTER  XII.  (59.) 

Off  EifTKY*  INTO  THE  FOREST,  (a.) 

1.  On  an  auspicious  day  selected  by  tho  astrologer 
and  suited  to  the  master,  when  tho  several  indications 
referred  to  in  my  work  on  Yafcra  are  all  good,  the  party  shall 
leave  for  tho  forest. 


2.  They  shall  hot  cut  trees  that  grow  on  cremation 
ground,  iu  roads,  in  temples,  ant-hills,  flower  gardens,  tho 
abodes  of  religions  devotees,  places  of  worship,  junctions  of 
rivers  a  i  well  as  trees  grown  by  human  labour, 

8.  They  shall  not  out  trees  that  are  bent,  that  are 
covered  with  creepers  or  struck  down  by  lightning  or 
broken  by  the  wind,  or  that  have  fallen  of  themselves  or 
that  are  broken  by  elephants  or  that  liavo  dried  or  have 
been  burnt  or  that  contain  the  bee-hive- 


4  The  trees  that  are  of  glossy  leaves,  (lowers  and 
fruits,  aro  fit  for  the  purpose  ;  the  tree  selected  shall  bo 
adorned  with  flowers  and  duly  honored# 

5 .  If  tho  master  is  a  Brahmin,  the  trees  Devadaru, 
Sandel,  Sami  and  Mndhtiku  are  fit  for  the  purpose.  If  the 
master  is  aKshatrya,  the  trees  Margosa,  Aswattha,  Kh&dira  >* 
and  Biiva  are  fit  for  the  purpose. 

6.  If  the  master  is  a  Vysya,  the  trees  Jeevaka,  Kha- 
dirn»  Sindhuka  and  Syaudana  should  bo  selected  for  the 


(a)  Tor  tlic  purpose  of  cutting  wood  for  the  images  of  the  Devaa* 

4 


biuhat  samhita 


ose  ;  and  if:  the  master  is  a  Sndra,  the  trees  Tindukn, 


Kesara,  B&rja  and  Arjmia  should  be  selected, 

7.  lu  the  formation  of  the  Linga  or  an  image,  the 
sides  of  tho  tree  as  it  grew  shall  be  preserved  ;  for  this 
purpose  the  sides  as  well  as  the  bottom  and  the  top  shall 
be  marked  before  cutting. 


8.  The  tree  to  bo  cut  shall  first  be  worshipped  with 
rice  cooked  in  milk,  sweet-meat  balls,  rice,  curdled  milk,  and 
sweet-meats  made  of  ground  Scsamura  and  sugar  and  tho 
like,  liquor,  flowers,  scented  smoke  and  sandal  paste. 

9.  Then  shall  bo  worshipped  at  night  the  Devas,  life 
Pitris.  tho  Pisachas,  the  Rakshasas,  the  Nagas,  the  Asnras, 
the  Ganadevos,  Vinayak  and  others.  The  tree  shall  bo 
touched  by  tho  hand  and  tho  following  mantras  shall  bo 
pronounced, 

10.  O  tree,  thou  hast  been  selected  for  the  image  of 
each  and  such  a  Deva.  Salutation  to  thee.  I  request  thee 
to  accept  tho  pnjaduly  performed  by  me, 

11.  The  Bhutas  that  might  dwell  in  this  tree  are  re¬ 
quested  to  accept  tho  presents  offered  and  depart  and  dwell 
in  some  other  place.  Kindly  bear  the  troubles  wo  subject 
you  to,  Salutation  to  you. 


12,  Early  next  morning  wder  shall  bo  poured  over 
the  root  of  the  tree  ;  the  axe  shall  bo  rubbed  oyer  with  honey 
and  ghoe,  and  the  tree  shall  first  be  cut  on  the  north-eastern 
side,  and  the  other  parts  shall  be  cut  rouud  from  loft  to 
right. 

J3.  If  the  tree  falls  on  the  eastern,  north-eastern  or 
the  northern  side,  it  indicates  prosperity.  But  if  it  falls  on 
the  remaning  five  sides — the  south-east,  the  south,  south¬ 
west,  &e  ,  there  will  respectively  bo  fear  from  fro,  suffering 
from  hunger,  disease,  disease  again,  and  tho  death  of  tlifi 
Worses, 


MatT»evs  connected  with  the  -ill  o'-  the  tree,  tlio 
it,  and  with  what  might  be  inside  t lie  tree  have 
neon  r  reined  of  by  me  in  the  Chapter  on  Indra-Dhv/aja  and 
on  House-building.  They  apply  here  also* 


CHAPTER  XIII.  i  GO.  I 

Os  the  fixing  of  the  Images  tn  Temples- 

1.  Either  on  the  northern  or  extern  part  of  tho 
temple,  the  person  learned  in  the  matter  shall  erect  a  shed 
with  openings  on  all  sides  and  adorn  it  with  plantain*  ami 
festoons* 

2  &  3*  The  eastern  part  of  the  shed  shrill  be  adorned 
with  garlands  of  flowers  and  with  flags  of  various  colors. 
The  south-eastern  side  shall  be  adorned  with  garlands  and 
flags  of  red  color.  The  southern  and  sotiih-wesfcern  sides 
shall  bo  adorned  with  those  of  black  color,  Garlands  and 
flags  ou  the  western  side  shall  bo  white  ;  those  on  tho  north¬ 
western  side  shall  be  white-red;  those  on  tho  northern  side 
shall  be  of  bright  color,  m(i  those  on  the  north-eastern  side 
shall  bu  of  yellow  color. 

4*  Images  made  from  wood  or  earth  will  give  the 
master  long  life,  wealth,  strength  and  success.  Images 
made  of  gems  or  precious  stones  will  do  good  to  tho  world 
at  largo.  Images  made  of  gold  will  give  tho  master  good 
health. 

5.  Images  of  silver  will,  increase  tho  master’s  fame. 
Images  of  copper  will  increase  his  family.  Images  of  stone 
or  the  Linga  will  bring  him  much  lands* 

6.  If  a  pike  is  seen  driven  into  an  im^go,  the  master 
will  perish  with  his  family;  if  there  be  holes  in  images,  the 
paster  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  never  ending  troubles4 

7-  The  platform  in  tho  centre  of  tho  shod  shall  bo 


]  JTCtlTAT  SA11BITA. 

.  with  cow-dung;  it  shall  then  be  covered  with 
and  over  it  Khali  be  spread  the  Kusa  grass  ;  and  the  image 
shall  bo  placed  in  it  in  the  Bbadrasana  posture — with  a  leg 
resting  on  the  ground  and  the  other  bent  up  horizontally  at 
the  knee. 

8.  The  image  shall  bo  bathed  with  the  milk  of  the 
Plaksha,  Aswatha,  Udumbara,  Sirishn,  and  Vain,  and  with 
water  mixed  with  the  Ku  a  grass  and  the  like  sacred  plants. 

9.  It  shall  also  bo  rubbed  with  earth  taken  from  place- 
trodden  over  by  elephants  and  bulls,  from  the  neighbour 
hood  of  mountains,  from  ant-hills,  from  tho  junction  bf  rivers 
and  lotus  tanks.  It  shall  also  bo  bathed  with  sacred  waters 
and  with  Panchagavya/fa) 

10.  It  shall  be  bathed  in  fragrant  waters  in  jars  in 
which  shall  be  thrown  gold  and  gems  attended  with  various 
music  and  with  the  chanting  of  Vedio  hymns  j  while  bath¬ 
ing,  the  image  shall  be  placed  to  face  the  east. 

11.  While  tho  image  is  being  bathed,  the  Brahmins 
shall  chant  the  mantras  sacred  to  Indraon  the  eastern  side; 
and  on  tho  south-eastern  side  shall  be  chanted  mantras 
Sacred  to  Agni.  The  master  shall  pay  the  Brahmins  well 
and  show  them  due  honors. 


<SL 

saml. 


12.  The  Brahmins  shall  throw  Abulia  into  the  fire, 
chanting  hymns  sacred  to  tho  particular  Deva  whose  imn<r’ 
is  before  them.  The  indications,  together  with  their  inter¬ 
pretations,  connected  with  the  hotna-firehave  already  been 
Btated  by  me  in  the  Chapter  on  Indra-Dhwnja. 


13.  If  the  flame  should  bo  attended  with  smokes  and 
sparks,  and  if  it  should  whirl  from  right  to  left,  it  indicates 
evil.  If  the  officiating  priest  should  bo  of  forgetful  memory 


»UkfghW,«!Sa£dJli5.Inl*toUrflo£  tt®  00W’*  coagulated  or  sour 


1?. 


'^Sg^begin  tp  quote  a' wrong  portion  of  the  Vedictext,  it  indi¬ 
cates  evil. 


BftlUAT  SAMTOTA 


[OS 


14,  After  bathing  the  imago,  it  shall  be  dressed  in  a 


new  cloth  and  adorned  with  flowers  and  sanc}al  and  shall 


be  laid  by  the  piaster  on  a  well-spread  bed. 

15.  The  night  shall  be  spent  by  the  side  of  the  image 
in  music  and  dance  by  persons  that  do  not  sleep,  and  the 
fixing  ceremony  shall  be  done  at  the  hour  mentioned  by  the 
astrologer. 

16.  The  next  day  the  image  shall  again  he  adorned, 
with  flowers,  cloth,  and  sandal  and  shall  be  taken  round  the 
temple  attended  with  tfee  music  of  the  conchrshell  ;^nd  other 
instruments. 

17.  A  large  quantity  of  cooked  rice  shall  be  presented 
to  the  image  ;  learned  Brahmins  shall  be  duly  honored  and 
pieces  of  gold  shall  be  thrown  into  the  central  pit  of  the 
pedestal- 

18.  Special  honors  shall  be  paid  to  the  officiating 
priest,  the  astrologer,  the  Brahmins,  learned  men  and. 
artists.  The  master  will  enjoy  prosperity  in  this  World  as 
well  as  in  the  next. 

19.  The  Bhagayatas  are  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu  ; 
the  Maga9  are  the  worshippers  pf  the  Sun  ;  Jh'fihmins  wonr- 
ing  ashes  are  the  worshippers  of  Siva.  Persons. possessed 
of  a  knowledge  of  the  Devas  attendant  on  the  Matri  Devas 
are  the  worshippers  of  the  Matri  Devas.  The  Brahmins 
generally  are  the  worshippers  of  Brahma.  The  Sakyas  are 
fho  worshippers  of  the  God  Qf  the  Arbats.  The  Boudhas 
are  the  worshippers  of  Bndha.  The  ceremony  of  fixing  the 
images  and  the  like  ceremonies  shall  be  performed  by  the 
respective  worshippers  of  the  several  images- 

20  &  21.  The  ceremony  of  fixing  the  image  shall  ba 
performed  in  the  Uttarayana — when  the  Sun’s  course  1st 


tho 

Moon  occupies  the  bouse,  the  Nuvamsa,  the  Tn  mearasa,  the 
Drekkanaor  the  l)e\ucUsnmsa  of  Jupiter;  when  the  rising 
sign  and  the  rising  N  avam  sa  are  fixed,  when  bene  fie  planets 
occupy  the  Kendra  or  the  Trikomi  houses,  and  the  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  3rd,  6th  and  ll  fch  houses,  when  the  Moon 
passes  either  through  any  of  the  fixed  asterisms  or  the  soft 
asterisms,  or  through  the  asteristn  of  Sravana,  Piishya  or 
Swati,  on  any  week  day  excepting  Tuesday,  and  on  a  day 
suited  to  the  master’s  star* 

22.  Thus  have  I  treated  briefly  of  tho  subject  of 
fixing  the  In  ages  in  Temples,  for  the  benefit  of  the  people 
at  large.  Surya  has,  in  his  work,  treated  at  full  length  of 
matters  connected  with  Adhivasana  (watching  the  image 
at  night  witli  music  and  dance)  and  with  fixing  tho  image* 
in  its  pedestal* 


CHAPTER  XIV.  (61.) 

On  the  Features  of  Cows  and  Oxen. 

1.  A  ll  that  Paras  a  ra  told  Brihadratha  about  cows  and 
oxen  I  shall  here  briefly  state.  I  shall  however  treat  scien¬ 
tifically  of  the  animals  possessing  good  features. 

.2  Cows  whose  eyes  are  dim  and  with  tears  and  dis* 
agreeable  to  look  at  and  whose  eyes  resemble  those  of  the 
mouse,  will  bring  on  misery.  Cows  whose  horns  are  moving 
and  flat,  whose  bodies  are  rough  and  whose  color  re  enable** 
that  of  the  ass,  will  also  bring  on  evil. 

3.  Cows  having  ten,  seven  or  four  teeth  and  those 
whose  beads  are  hanging  and  hairless,  whose  backs  are  bent 
or  depressed,  necks  short  and  thick,  hip  resembling  a  grain 
of  barley  in  shape,  whose  hoofs  are  broken. 

4-  As  well  as  those  with  long,  red,  black  tongues 
with  small  ankles,  with  a  large  hump  outlie  back,  with  thin 


tMHAV  B AMH1TA. 


rds  the  north, — in  the  light  half  of  a  month,  when 


&RUB9  SAMH1TA.  [CH. 

th  either  defective  or  excessive  organic 

will  bring  on  evil* 

5.  The  ox  whose  testicle  is  large  and  hangs  down* 
whose  breast  is  covered  with  muscles,  whose  cheek  is  large 
and  marked  with  sinews*  and  whose  penis  is  thick  in  three 
places,  will  bring  on  evil. 

d.  The  ox,  whose  eyes  rcneroblo  those  of  the  cab, 
whose  color  is  brown,  whose  body  is  rough,  whose  lips,  jaws 
and  tongue  are  black,  whose  breathing  is  like  snoring,  and 
which  causes  annoyance  to  the  herd  of  cows*  is  not  fit  for 
the  Brahmins. 

7.  The  ox  that  passes  excrement  in  large  lumps,  whoso 
horns  do  not  grow,  whose  belly  is  white,  whose  body  is  of 
the  color  of  bhe  deer  and  which  causes  annoyance  to  the 
herd  of  cows,  is  to  be  rejected  though  it  may  be  a  home- 
bred  one. 

o,  The  ox  which  is  black/ of  ashy  color,  or  of  the 
color  of  the  Sun,  and  whose  eyes  resemble  those  of  the  cat, 
is  not  fib  for  Brahmins. 

9.  The  ox,  which,  while  at  work  lifts  up  its  leg  as  if 
from  a  mire.,  whose  neck  is  thin  and  eyes  fearful,  is  an  ani¬ 
mal  of  inferior  kind.  Such  animals  cannot  carry  heavy 
burdens* 

10.  The  ox  whoso  lips  are  soft-,  close  and  red,  whoso 
ears  are  small,  short  and  raised  up,  whose  belly  is  fine, 
whose  ankles  are  prominent* 

1.1.  Whoso  hoofs  are  red  and  close,  whose  breast  is 
strong,  the  hump  on  whoso  back  is  lurge,  whoso  skin  and 
hair  are  line,  soft  and  thin,  whose  horns  are  red  and  small, 

12.  Whose  tail  is  thin  and  long*  whose  eyes  are  red 
at  the  ends,  whose  breathing  is  loud,  whose  shoulders  are 
like  those  of  the  lion,  whoso  dew-lap  is  soft  and  small  and, 
whose  gait  is  beautiful,  is  of  an  excellent  kind. 


under  bodies  ana  wii 


U  WHOSO  um'iuuio  uviudv  vt 


or  the  jas~ 
thick  and 
carry  heavy 

"he  ox  with  a  wrinkle  at.  the  end  of  its  -nose, 
is  like  that  of  the  cat,  whose  right  side  is  white, 

♦  is  that  of, the  white  or  bine  lotus  or  red  cotton, 
ia  fine  and  whose  speed  is  like  that  of  the  horse  ; 
Vbose  testicle  is  hanging,  whose  belly  i;  like 
o  goat,  and  whose  buttocks  and  breast  arc  on- 
11  bring  on  prosperity,  carry  heavy  burdens  and 
stances. 

’he  ox  which  is  white,  whose  eyes  are  of  brown 
O  horns  are  red  and  whose  face  is  large,  is  known 
It  brings  on  prosperity  and  an  increase  of  the 

/he  ox  whose  tail  hangs  to  the  ground,  whose 
id  eyes  are  red.  and  the  hump  on  whose  back  is 
ihose  body  is  variously  colored,  will  make  his 
lord  of  wealth  at  once. 

die  ox,  one  of  whoso  legs  is  white,  is  also  a  good 
vev  maybe  his  color.  If  oxen  of  excellent  sort 
lad,  those  of  middle  importance  may  be  procured 


CHAPTER  XV.  (62), 

Oh  hie  Features  of  the  Doc. 

;ie  dog  which  has  five  nails  in  each  of  its  hind 
in  the  left  front  leg,  and  six,  in  tbo  right  f  on 
'  % 


are 


eyes  arc  like  Vydurga 
tbble,  whose  eye-lids  ore 
■se,  is  also  excellent  and  will 


BRIHAT  S  AM  IT  A- 


^vW'hose  lips  and  the  tip  of  whoso  nose  are  red,  who’s©  g*U 
fliko  that  of  the'  Hon,  which  walks  smelling  the  ground., 
and  whose  tail  is  hairy,  eyes  like  stars,  ears  hanging  md 
Sufc,  will  before  long  make  his  master  exceedingly  wealthy. 

2.  ihe  bitch  which  lias  five  nails  in  each  of  the  hind 
legs,  six  in  the  left  front  leg  and  live  in  the  right  front  leg* 
whose  eyes  are  like  jasmine*  whose  tail  is  curled  up  and 
whose  body  is  of  brown  color  and  ears  hanging*  will  protect 
the  kingdom  of  her  master. 


CHAPTER  XV L  (03.) 

Ok  the  Features  of  the  Cock.- 

1.  The  cock  whose  wings  and  lingers  are  straight* 
Whose  mouth,  nail  and  comb  are  red,  whose  body  is  white, 
and  which  crows  melodiously  early  in  the  morning,  Will 
bring  ou  prosperity  to  the  king,  his  kingdom  and  his  horse* 

2.  The  cook  whose  neck  is  of  the  shape  of  the  barley, 
whoso  body  is  of  the  color  df  the  fruit  Badari,  and  one  whose 
head  is  large  and  body  of  different  colors,  are  excellent,  in 
fight.  The  eock  of  the  color  of  honey  or  the  bee  will  bring 
cm  success  ;  one  that  is  of  thin  body  and  of  a  weak  throat 
and  lame  legs  is  not  a  good  one. 

3.  The  ben  which  crows  softly  and  melodiously,  whose 
body  is  fine  and  glossy,  and  whose  face  and  eyes  are  beauti¬ 
ful,  will  bring  to  a  king  wealth*  fame,  success*  health  and 
strength. 


CH  APTER  XVII.  (64). 

On  the  Features  op  the  Turtle. 

1.  The  turtle  which  is  of  the  color  of  the  crystal  or 
silver,  adorned  with  black  lines,  whose  body  is  of  the  .shape 
of  the  pot,  and  whose  back-bone  is  beautiful,  and  the  turtle 
whose  body  is  of  the  color  of  the  Sun  and  covered  with  uu- 


BRITT  AT  SAMHITA* 


Sajfti^roirs  small  spots,  will  make  a  person  as  prosperous  as  a 
prince  if  they  dwell  in  his  house. 

2.  The  turtle  which  is  l^ack  as  the  bee  or  collyrium 
with  beautiful  spots  over  his  body,  which  has  no  defective 
organs,  whose  head  is  like  that  of  the  serpent  and  whose 
neck  is  large,  will  increase  the  territories  of  the  king. 

3.  The  turtle  of  the  color  of  Vydurya,  whose  nock  is 
large,  whose  body  is  smooth  and  of  triangular  shape,  and 
whose  back-bone  is  beautiful,  is  of  excellent  Id  tick  It  shall 
be  put  in  pleasure  tanks  arid  water  pots  by  kings  for  the 
increase  of  their  prosperity* 


CHAPTER  XVIII.  (M  ) 

On  the  Features  ok  the  Goat. 

1.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  bad  and  good 
features  of  the  goat.  A  goat  which  W  8,  9  or  10  teeth  will 
bring  wealth  to  a  person  if  it  dwells  in  hishou.se.  One  that 
has  7  teeth  shall  be  rejected. 

2f  A  white  goat  which  has  a.  black  ringlet  on  the  right 
side  brings  on  prosperity.  A  goat  that  resembles  the  ante¬ 
lope  whose  color  his  black-red  and  which  has  a  white  ring¬ 
let,  conduces  to  prosperity. 

3.  The  fleshy  excrescence  which  hangs  from  the  neck 
of  a  goat  is  known  as  Manl  A  goat  with  a  single  mani 
brin  gs  on  prosperity ;  one  that  has  two  or  three  mauis  brings 
Oil  wealth. 

4.  A  goat  that  has  no  wool  on  it  will  make  the  owner 
prosperous,  and  one  that  is  either  wholly  whir©  or  w  holly 
black,  or  half  white  and  half  black,  or  half  brown  aud  half 
black,  will  bring  on  wealth. 

Th§  goat  which  passes  as  the  foremost  of  the  herd 


K 


DRtlUT  BAMHITA. 


[ca 


jJSH'/hich  first  gets  into  water,  will  do  good  as  well  as  one 
with  a  white  bond  or  with  a  tikkiko/?)  in  the  head, 

0,  A.  goat  which  has  a  ringlet,  in  the  neck  or  head,  or, 
one  which  is  of  the  color  of  the  Sesamum  flour,  or  with  red 
eyes  or  of  white  body  and  black  legs,  or  of  black  body  and 
white  legs,  will  bring. on  prosperity. 

7*  A  goat  whose  body  is  white,  whose  testicles  are 
black*  and  which  has  a  strip  of  cast  off  skin  round  the  waist, 
as  well  as  the  goat  that  walk??  gently  and  with  incise  will 
bring  on  prosperity* 

S„  A.  goat  whose  horns  and  legs  resemble  those  of  the 
antelope,  as  well  as  fche  one  whoso  front,  part  is  white  and 
the  hind  part  blacky  will  bring  on  prosperity.  Tho^f  olio  wing 
is  Qarga’a  stanza  on  the  subject  of  the  goat. 

9.  The  four  species  of  goats  known  as  EuttttJcd,  KiUila, 
Jatila  and  Vamana  are  the  children  of  Lakshmi,  the  Goddess 
of  wealth.  These  will  never  be  found  to  live  under  the  roof 
of  poor  people* 

10.  A  goat  that  bleats  like  the  ass,  whose  tail  is  bright, 
nails  disfigured,  body  of  bad  color,  e&rs  put  or  clipped,  head 
resembling  that  of  the  elephant,  and  mouth  corners  and  the 
tongue  black*  will  nob  conduce  to  prosperity. 

11.  A  goat  which  is  of  excellent  color,  with  a  lino 
n\ano  ami  with  no  wool  on  its  body,  and  whose  eyes  are  red, 
>yill  bring  to  his  master  healthy  fame  and  wealth- 


CHAPTER  Xix.  (66). 

On  the  Features  of  the  House. 


1.  The  horse  whose  neck  and  eyes  are  long,  breast  and 
mane  broad  lips,  tongue  and  the  corners  of  mouth  red  ;  skin1 
hair  and  tail  thin  ;  hoof,  gait  and  face  beautiful ;  cars,  lips  and 
tails  short;  shanks,  knees  aud  thighs  round  ;  teeth  evtm  and 


BRIFIAT  SAME  IT*. 


tilth.] 


and  limbs  symmetrical,  fine,  smooth  and  clean,  will 
cause  the  death  of  the  enemies  of  the  king. 

2.  The  horse  which  lias  a  ringlet  under  the  ejres,  ia  the 
chin,  cheek,  heart,  neck,  tho  part  between  tho  nostrils,  tem¬ 
ples,  the  buttocks,  part  balow  tbo  nostrils,  knees,  testicles, 
navel,  bump  on  the  back,  anus,  right  belly  and  feet,  will 
bring  on  evil. 

8.  The  horse  which  has  ringlets,  in  the  upper-lip,  nock, 
ears,  back,  loins,  eyes,  lips,  thighs,  front  legs,  belly,  sides  and 
fore-head,  will  bring  on  prosperity. 

4.  Of  these  bonofxc  curls  and  ringlets  there  shall  be 
only  one  in  tho  upper  lip,  one  named  Dhruva  in.  the  fore¬ 
head  and  mane  and  two  in  the  Randhra  (?)  and  ITpanindhm 
(?)  parts  of  its  head  and  in  the  breast. 

5.  A  colt  lias  six  white  teeth.  If  tho  teeth  be  of  brown 
color,  the  animal  is  2  years  old  ;  if  the  centra;  and  corner 
teeth  in  both  linos  have  fallen  and  sprouted  again,  the 
animal  is  from  8  to  6  years  old,  according  as  the  numb  r  of 
such  teeth  is  8,  4  or  5  ;  if  the  lines  known  as  Kaliha ,  A  pet  a 
(;>  yellow  line),  Si  (Ida  (black  line),  Kacha  (white  lino);  Mali- 
stdka  (of  the  color  of  the  bee)  or  iSccnkh a  (of  the  color  of 
tho  conch  shell)  appear  in  the  teeth,  tho  age  of  the  animal 
will  respectively  bo  from  0  to  8,  9  to  11,  12  to  14,  Jo  t  ,  )7, 
18  to  20  or  21  to  23.  If  depressions  appear  in  tho  teeth  or 
if  the  teeth  have  begun  to  shake,  or  if  they  have  fallen,  the 
age  varies  from  24  to  60* 


CHAPTER  XX.  (670 
Ox  the  Features  ob*  tee  Elephant. 

1.  The  elephant  whose  tusks  are  of  the  color  of  honey, 


whose  limbs  are  well-defined,  whose  body  is  neither  large 
nor  small,  and  which  is  capable  of  bearing  heavy  border:  s, 
avhoso  limbs  are  .symmetrical,  whose  back  bone*  are  like 


i  ° 

io 


UK  I  HAT  JSAMH.ITA. 


[ext.  20 


bows  and  whose  buttocks  resemble  those  of  the  pig,  is  bown 
a,s  Bhadra. 

2.  The  elephant  whose  breast,  arm-pits  and  folds  of 
Bkiu  are  loose,  whose  belly  is  hanging,  whose  skin  and  neck 
are  thick,  whose  abdomen  resembles  that  of  the  crow,  and 
whose  eyes  are  like  those  of  the  lion,  is  known  as  Manda. 

o*  1  he  elephant  whose  lips,  tail  and.  genital  organ  are 
short,  whoso  legs,  neck,  tusks,  trunk  and  the  ears  are  small 
and  whose  eyes  are  large,  is  known  as  Mriga.  The  elephant 
which  possesses  the  three  sets  of  features  above  referred  to,, 
is  known  as  Sanhima. 

4.  The  Mr iga  class  of  elephants  are  5  cubits  high,  7 
cubits  long  and  8  cubits  broad.  The  Manda  and  Bhadra 
classes  aro  larger  by  one  and  two  cubits  respectively  in 
each  respect.  No  fixed  measurement  is  prescribed  for  the 
Sankiraa  class  of  elephants. 

,*>.  The  Bhadra  is  of  green  color  and  is  a  rutting  ele¬ 
phant,  The  Manda  is  of  yellow  color.  The  Mrignhis  of  black 
color  and  is  also  a  rutting  elephant.  The  Sankirua  is  of 
mixed  color  and  a  rutting  elephant. 

6  &  7.  The  elephant  whose  lips  and  mouth  are  red,- 
whose  eyes  resemble  those  of  the  sparrow,  whose  tusks  are 
shining,  rising  and  with  sharp  end,  whose  face  is  large  and 
long-,  whose  back  bones  are  like  bows,  long  and  invisible, 
whoso  mastaha *  (round  protuberances  on  the  temples)  are 
covet  ed  with  hair  and  resemble  the  turtle,  whose  ears,  month 
corners,  navel,  fore-head  and  genital  organs  are  large,  whose 
body  resembles  the  turtle,  whose  nails  are  18  or  20,  whose 
trunk  has  three  lines  and  is  rouud,  whose  tail  is  beautiful, 
and  Whose  juice  (whenin  rut)  is  felt  to  be  of  good  srhell 
whoa  the  animal  blows  through  its  trunk,  will  bring  on 
W ealth. 

The  elephant  whose  tail  is  long,  trunk  red,  roar 


Bft  I  HAT  SAM  HIT  A, 


itl-rke  that  of  tho  clouds,  and  neck  large,  long  and  round,  will 
bring  wealth  to  a  king* 

9  &  10.  Non-rutting  elephants/  those  which  possess 
extra  or  defective  organs,  those  which  are  lame  or  short  or 
whose  tusks  resemble  the  horns  of  the  sheep,  whose  testtclea 
are  visible,  those  which  possess  little  or  no  trunk, 
whose  mouth  corners  are  brown,  blue,  black  or  of  different 
colors,  those  which  possess  very  little  hair  about  the  face* 
those  which  have  no  tusks,  those  which  have  no  virility 
female  elephants  possessing  the  features  of  a  male  elephant, 
and  pvegnaut  elephants  must  be  sent  away  to  foreign  lands, 
They  produce  misery. 


(CHAPTER  XXL  (68.) 


On  the  Features  of  Man. 


I.  A  learned  person  shall  examine  a  roan’s  (1)  Kshc- 
tra  (body,  (2)  Mrija  (complexion),  (3)  Swara  (voice),  (  t) 
Sara  (strength),  (5)  Samhabi  (joints),  (6)  Sneha  (gloss),  (7) 
Varna  (color),  (8)  Anuka  (shape  of  the  face),  (9)  TTnmana 
(height'?,  (10 J  Marta  (weight),  (11)  Prakriti  (disposition) 
and  (12)  Gati  (gait)  and  then  predict  his  fortune* 


I.  — Eshetra  (Physical  Features ). 


2.  If  the  feet  be  dry,  with  soft  soles,  of  the  color  of 
the  lotus,  with  close  toes,  beautiful,  red  nails,  beautiful  heels, 
always  warm  without  visible  sinews,  with  invisible  ankle 
and  raised  like  the  turtle,  the  person  will  be  a  king. 

3.  If  the  faet  be  like  winnows,  crooked  or  bent,  cover¬ 
ed  with  sinews,  dry,  with  toes  not  close  and  with  nail 
white  and  not  glossy,  the  person  will  be  poor.  If  the  feet 
be  large,  he  will  walk  much;  if  of  brown  color,  his  family 
will  perish  ;if  the  fsoles  be  of  the  color>of  burnt  clay,  he  will 
murder  a  Brahmin  ;  and  if  the  color  be  yellow,  he  will  have 

exual  intercourse  with  women  under  prohibition- 


mmiT  snor/rA,  &*'• 

^  ':'^y  4,  If  tlio  shanks  bo  covered  wit h  hair,  thin  and  scatter- 
^  and  if  they  be  round,  if  the  thighs  be  like  the  trunk  Of  the 
elephant,  arid  i£  the  knees  be  large  and  both  alike,  the  person 
Will  be  a  king.  But  if  the  shanks  resemble  those  of  n  dog 
or  a  jackal,,  tho  person  will  bo  poor, 

5.  If  a  single  hair  grow  from  each  cell  over  the  body, 
the  person  will  bo  a  king ;  if  two  hairs  grow  Bom  it,  tho 
person  will  be  learned  and  will  scrupulously  obset  vo  the 
duties  of  life  as  prescribed  in  tho  "V  odas  ;  if  three  or  more, 
the  person  will  be  poor  and  afflicted  with  grief,  rJ  he  same 
remarks  apply  to  the  hairs  of  the  head- 

6,.  If  there  bo  no  flesh  in  tho  knees,  the  person  .  will  die 
:in  his  travels  ;  if  the  knees  be  small,  bo  will  become  popu¬ 
lar;  if  broad,  he  will  become  poor;  if  sunk,  be  will  be  sub¬ 
ject  to  women  ;  if  covered  with  flesh,  he  wilt  become  a  king, 
and  if  large,  he  will  live  long, 

7.  If  the  penis'ho  small,  the  person  will  be  rich  ;  if 
large'  be  will  have  no  sons  ;  il  it  be  inclined  on  the  left  sider 
lie  will  be  poor;  if  not  straight,  ho  will  be  without  sous  and 
without  money  ;  if  straight,  he  will  have  sons;  if  pointing  to 
tho  ground,  he  will  bo  poor;  if  covered  with  muscles,  he  will 
have  very  few  sons  ;  if  the  nut  of  the  penis  be  large,  he 
will  live  in  comfort;  and  if  the  penis  be  soft,,  ho  will  die  of 
urinary  and  the  like  diseases. 


§L 


8.  If  the  nut  be  invisible,  be  will  be  a  king  :  if  the 
penis  bo  long*  and  fallen,  ho  will  be  poor;  audit  either 
straight,  and  round  or  small  and  with  sinews,  bo  will  be  rich- 
0.  A  person  with  a  single  'testicle  will  suffer  death  by 
drowning  ;  if  the  test  icles  be  not  alike,  he  will  bo  fund  of 
sexual  intercourse  ;  if  both  be  alike,  be  will  be  a  ki“g ;  if 
they  be  raised  np,  the*  person  will  not  livelong;  arid  if  they 
bang  down  ln>  will  live  to  the  age  of  100  years. 

10.  If  the  nut  of  the  penis  be  red,  the  person  will  htf 


T.1S1BAT  KAMIISTA. 


,(SL 


if  it  be  either  white  or  of  dim  color,  be  will  be  poor ; 


if  the  urine  fall  with  noise,  the  person  will  live  in  comfort; 
nnd  if  without  noise,  he  will  be  poor. 

If  th o  urine,  fall  in  two,  three  or  four  lines  and 


11. 


twisting  from  left  to  right;  the  person  will  be  ti  king;  and 
if  it  fall  broken  and  scattered.,  be  will  be  poor. 


12.  If  the  urine  fall  in  a  line  and  twisted,  the  person 
will  get  a  very  beautiful  son.  If  the  glans  penis  be  glossy, 
raised  and  even,  the  person,  will  enjoy  wealth,  women 
gems. 


13.  If  the  fffanx  penis  be  depressed  In  the  middle,  the 
person  will  get  daughters  and  will  he  poor  ;  if  raised  in  tdie 
middle,  he  will  possess  many  cows;  if  it  be  not  very  large 
or  verv  much  raised,  he  will  be  rich. 


14,  If  the  urinary  orifice  be  dry,  the  person  will  be 
poor  and  ugly  ;  if  the  semen  smell  like  a  floWer,  the  person 
will  bo  u 


15.  If  the  sewn  should  smell  like  honey,  the  person 
will  ho  very  rich  ;  if  it  smell  like  fisli,  ho  will  have  many 
children  ;  if  it  be  thin,  he  will  get  daughters,  and  if  of  the 
sineil  of  flesh,  bo  will  live  in  great  comfort. 

16.  If  it  be  of  the  smell  of  alcohol,  the  person  will 
perform  sacrificial  fire  ceremonies;  if  of  the  smell  of  salt, 
lie  will  be  poor.  A  person  whose  sexual  intercourse  lasts 
for  a  short  time,  will  live  long;  if  otherwise,  he  will  die 


early. 

17.  A.  person  whose  rump  is  largo,  will  be  poor.  It 
the  rump  be  full  of  flesh,  ibe  person  will  live  in  comfort; 
if  it  be  half  the  average  si*e,  lie  will  be  sickly  ;  and  if  it 
resemble  that  of  a  frog,  be  will  he  a  king. 

18.  If  the  Ivins  resemble  those  of  the  lion,  the  person 
will  be  a  king;  if  >hey  resemble  those  of  the  monkey  oi 


BUIIUT  SAMHiTA- 


[CH- 


<SL 


camel,  lie  will  be  poor;  ifth g  abdomen  bo  even,  the  per- 
son  will  live  in  comfort ;  if  it  be  like  a  pot,  ha  will  be  poor. 

19.  If  the  sides  be  not  defective,  the  person  will  be 
rich  ;  if  they  be  depressed  and  bent,  he  will  have  no  enjoy- 
went ;  if  the  belly  be  even,  the  person  will  live  well;  if  it 
be  depressed,  lie  will  have -no  enjoyment. 

20.  If  i\n>~  belly  be  high,  the  person  will  be  a  king ; 
if  it  be  uneven,  lie  will  be  a  man  of  perverted  understanding 
if  it  be  like  that  of  the  serpent,  he  will  be  poor  and  glut¬ 
tonous. 

2*1.  If  the  navel  bo  broad  and  high  all  round,  tho 
person  will  live  in  comfort  ;  if  it  be ’small  and  if  the  pit  bo 
not  visible,  the  person  will  bo  afflicted  with  miseries'. 

2*2*  If  tlio  navel  be  in  the  middle  of  a  fold  of  the  skin 
or  if  it  be  depressed,  the  person  will  suffer  from  belly-ache 
and  will  be  poor;  if  the  navel  turn  from  right  to  left,  the 
person  will  be  a  cheat  ;  if  it  turn  from  left  to  right,  he  will 
be  a  man  of  good  perception  and  strong  memory. 

23.  If  the  navel  extend  on  b<»th  sides  horizontally, 
the  person  with  live  long  j  if  it  extend  vertically  upwards, 
ho  will  be  rich  ;  if  vertically  downwards,  be  will  have  cows  ; 
and  if  it  be  like  the  color  of  the  lotus,  the  person  will  be  a 
king. 

24..  If  there  bo  one,  two,  three  or  four  folds  of  shin 
in  the  belly,  the  person  will  die  wounded  by  a  weapon,  will 
enjoy  women,  will  become  a  tenche’r  and  will  be  vastly 
learned  respectively.  II  there  bo  no  folds,  tho  person  will 
be  a  king. 

25.  If  the  folds  be  nob  straight,  the  person  will  be 
wicked  and  will  have  sexual  intercourse  with  women  under 
prohibition  ;  if  they  be  straight,  he  will  live  iu  comfort  and 
will  never  covet  the  wives  of  other  men. 

2G.  If  the  sides’;be  fleshy  and  soft  and  if  tire  ringlets 
of  hair  over  them  turn  from  left  to  right,  the  person  will  bo 


BEX  HAT  SAM  HIT A. 


1<R 


g.  If  otherwise,  he  will  bo  poor  and  wretched  and 
will  serve  under  others. 


27.  If  the  nip'ple  of  the  breast  be  not  |;igh^  the  per¬ 
son  will  be  popular ;  if  the  two  nipples  be  long  and  not 
alike  he  will  be  poor;  if  they  be  large,  whether  high  or 
sunk,  the  person  will  be  a  king  and  will  live  in  comfort. 

28-  Jf  the  bosom  be  high,  Abroad,  fleshy  and  firrn:,  (ho 
person  will  be  a  king ;  it  otherwise  and  covered  with  stiff 
hair  and  muscles,  the  person  will  be  the  meanest  of  man¬ 
kind. 


29.  If  the  bosom  be  even,  the  person  will  be  rich  ; 
if  large,  ho  will  he  a  hero;  if  small,  poor;  if  uneven,  he  will 
be  poor  and  die  by  a  weapon. 

30.  If  the  collar  hones  be  not  alike,  the  person  will  bo 
wicked  ;  if  the  joints  of  the  bones  be  large,  he  will  bo  poor  , 
if  they  be  high,  he  will  live  well  ;  if  depressed,  he  will  bo 
poor;  and  if  large,  ho  will  J»e  rich. 

dl.  jf  the  neck  bo  flat  or  dry  or  covered  with  muscles, 
i#ia  person  will  become  poor  ;  if  it  be  like  that  of  the  buffalo, 
he  will  be  a  valiant  soldier ;  and  if  it  be  like  that  of  the  ox, 
he  will  die  by  a  weapon. 

32,  If  the  neck  be  like  the  conch  shall,  the  person  will 
be  a  king  ,  it  it  be  hanging,  the  person  will  bo  a  glutton  ; 
if  the  back  be  even  arid  without  luurs,  the  person  will  be 
rich,  otherwise,  he  will  be  poor. 


33.  If  the  armpits  be  dry,  large,  high,  of  good  smell, 
both  alike  and  with  much  hair,  the  person  will  be  rich  ;  if 
otherwise,  he  will  be  poor. 

34.  If  the  shoulders  be  Without  flesh,  covered  with 
hoir,  sunk  and  small,  the  person  will  be  poor  ;  but  if  broad, 
high  and  close,  he  will  live  in  comfort  and  be  powerful. 

If  the  two  arms  be  round,  like  the  trunk  of  th® 


BRtQAT  SAMHITA. 


<SL 


BRIHAT  SAMHiTA.  [CH* 

pliant,  largre,  both  alike,  and  bunging  down  to  the  knees, 
the  person  will  be  a  king  ;  but  if  they  be  short  and  covered 
with  hair,  he  will  be  the  meanest  of  mankind. 

3(5.  If  the  fibers  of  the  hand  be  long,  the  person  will 
live  in  comfort  ;  if  they  be  without  skin  folds,  ho  will  bo 
popular;  if  small,  he  will  Joe  intelligent  5  and  if  flat,  lie  will 
serve  under  others. 

37.  If  the  fingers  of  the  baud  bo  largo,  the  person  will 
be  poor,  and  if  bent  upwards,  he  will  die  by  weapons.  If 
the  hands  be  ]iko*those  of  the  monkey,  the  person  will  h<* 
rich,  and  if  like  those  of  the  tiger,  lie  will  be  wicked. 

38.  If  the  wrists  be  invisible,  firm  and  close,  the  person 
will  be  a  king ;  if  otherwise  and  if  the  joints  be  loose,  the 
bands  will  suffer  sword-cut  f  and  if  they  should  crack,  ho 
will  be  poor. 

39.  If  t \iepctlm  of  the  baud  be  hollow,  the  person  will 
not  inherit  his  fathers  property  ;  if  it  be  round  and  hollow, 
he  will  be  rich  ;  and  if  high,  he  will  be  gejaoro.ua. 

40.  If  the1  palpps  of  both  hands  be  alike,  tho  person 
will  bo  poor  and  wicked  ;  if  red,  he  will  be  rich  ;  if  3' el  low, 
be  will  cohabit  with  women  under’prohibition  ;  and  if  dry, 
lie  will  be  poor. 


4h  If  the  nail  resemble  the  husk*  of  paddy,  the  person 
will  be  a  hermaphrodite  ;  if  Hut  and  split,  he  will  be  poor  ; 
if  of  bad  color,  he  will  be  of  wrong  views  ;  and  if  rad,  be  will 
be  a  king. 

If,  in  the  middle  of  the  thumb)  there  be  lines  of 
the  shape  of  a  barley,  the  person  will  be  rich  ;  if  the  same 
be  found  at  the  root  of  the  thumb,  ho  will  hay  o'  sons.  If 
tho  joints  of  the  fingers  be  long,  the  person  will  bo  popular 
and  will  live  long. 

4d.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  l>o  glossy  and 
deep,  tho  man  will  be  rich;  if  otherwise,  he  will  bo  poo1’ 


Beirut'  8AMIMTA. 


if1*] 


§L 


fingers  bo  nob  close,  the  person  will  be  poor;  and  if 
close,  he  will  earn  much  money, 

41.  If  the  three  lines  issuing  from  the  wrist  reach 
the  middle  of  the  palm,  the  person  Will  be  a  king,  and  if 
there  be  two  marks  of  the  shape  of  the  fish  in  the  middle  of 
the  pajm,  the  person  will  daily  feed  many  people. 

45.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  be  of  the  shape  of  yap 
rayudha,  the  person  will  be  rich  ,*  if  they  be  of  the  shape  of 
the  tail  of  the  fish,  he  will  be  learned  ;  if  of  the  shape  of  a 
conch  shell,  an  umbrella,  a  palankin,  an  elephant,  a  horse 
or  a  lotus,  the  person  will  be  a  king. 

4G.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  of  the 
shape  of  a  pot,  the  stem  of  a  lotus,  a  flag  or  the  hook  of  the 
elephant  driver,  the  person  will  be  a  guardian  of  treasure* 
If  the  lines  appear  twisted  like  a  rope,  or  if  the  lines  be 
irianguhir  in  shape,  the  person  will  be  rich 


47.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  of  the 
shape  of  the  discus,  the  sword,  the  axe,  the  club,  the  spear 
or  the  bow,  the  person  will  bo  a  commander  of  armies ;  if 
the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a  mortar*  the  person  will  per¬ 
form  sacrificial  fire  ceremonies. 


48.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  be  of  the 
shape  of  a  crocodile,  a  flag,  or  a  cow-shed,  the  person  will  be 
very  rich  ;  if  the  lines  at  the  root  of  the  thumb  be  of  the 
shape  of  a  Vedi  (sacrificial  altar),  the  person  will  perform 
sacrificial  rites. 


49.  If  the  lines  in  the  palm  of  the  band  be  of  the 
shape  of  a  tank,  a  temple  and  the  like,  or  if  they  be  trian¬ 
gular  in  shape*  the  person  will  do  acts  of  charity.  The  b.g 
lines  below  the  thumb  indicate  sons  and  the  small  lines 
daughters. 

50.  Lines  reaching  the  root  of  the  forefinger  indicate 
the  age  of  the  person  to  be  100 ;  if  the  line  be  of  shorter 

14 


BRI HAT  6AMHITA.  tCn' 

bo  ascertained  by  proportion.  If 
the  person  will  fall  from  a  tree  ;  if  there  bo 
either  many  lines  or  no  lines,  the  person  will  bo  poor. 

51.  If  the  chin  bo  very  small  and  long,  the  person 
will  be  poor  ;  if  covered  with  flesh,  be  will  be  rich  if  the 
lower  lip  bo  red  and  straight,  the  person  will  be  a  king ;  and 
jf  small  he  will  bo  poor. 

52.  I!  the  lips  be  split  or  appear  cut  or  of  bad  color  or 
dry,  the  person  will  bo  poor.  If  the  teeth  be  glossy,  close, 
sharp  and  regular,  the  person  will  be  happy. 

53.  If  tbs  tongue  be  red,  long,  smooth  and  oven,  the 
person  will  live  in  comfort  ;  but  if  it  be  white  or  black  and 
dry.  he  will  be  poor;  the  samo  remarks  apply  to  the  corners 
of  the  mionth. 

54.  If  the  face  be  beautiful,  slightly  open-mouthed 
clear,  smooth  and  even,  the  person  will  bo  a  king  ;  and  if 
otherwise,  be  will  bo  afflicted  with  grief  ;  if  the  face  bo 
large,  the  person  will  be  happy- 

55-  If  the  face  be  like  that  of  a  woman,  the  person 
will  have  no  sons  ,-  if  it  bo  round,  he  will  be  a  cheat ;  if  long, 
poor;  and  if  timid,  wicked, 

56.  If  the  face  be  oblongular  in  shape,  the  person  will 
be  a  cheat :  if  depressed  or  sunk,  he  will  have  no  sons  ;  if 
very  small,  a  miser ;  and  if  full  and  beautiful,  happy. 

57.  If  the  hair  about  the  face  bo  not  split  at  the  euds 
be  soft,  and  bent,  the  person  will  bo  happy  ;  and  if  it  bo 
red,  not  glossy  and  small  In  quantity,  the  person  will  be  a 

kief. 

58.  If  the  ears  be  without  flesh,  the  person  will  die 
an  unuatnral  death  ;  if  like  a  cup,  he  will  live  in  comfort; 
if  small,  be  will  bo  a  miser  ;  and  if  they  ta  per  in  a  point  like 
a  cone,  the  person  will  be  a  king. 


r.gtk,  the  age 
lines  be  broken, 


s 


BttlHAT  SAMHITA. 


Cig.lpi..] 


OB.  If  the  ears  be  covered  with  hair,  the  person  -will 


jive  long;  if  they  be  broad,  he  will  be  rich  ;  if  covered  with 
muscles,  he  will  be  wicked ;  and  if  they  hang  and  be  fleshy, 
he  will  live  well. 

€0.  If  the  cheek  be  not  sunk,  the  person  will  live  in 
coinfort ;  if  it  b©  fleshy,  he  will  become  a  minister.  If  the 
nose,  be  like  that  of  the  parrot,  the  person  will  live  in  com¬ 
fort;  and  If  it  be  dry,  he  will  live  long. 

Cl.  If  the  nose  appear  aslf  cut,  the  person  will  cohabit 
with  women  under  prohibition  ;  if  it  be  long,  he  will  bo 
wealthy  ;  if  bent,  ho  will  be  a  thief;  and  if  flat,  he  will  bo 
killed  by  a  woman. 

62.  If  tbo  end  of  the  nose  be  bent,  the  person  will  bo 
rich  ;  if  it  bo  bent  on  the  right  side,  ho  will  be  wicked  and 
gluttonous /  ancl  if  it  be  straight,  with  small  holes  and  ap¬ 
pear  beautiful,  the  person  will  bo  wealthy. 

63.  If  the  sneeze  occur  twieo  or  tbrico  at  a  time 
and  the  sound  be  not  disagreeable,  the  person  will  be  rich  ; 
and  if  it  be  long  and  of  the  same  sound  throughout,  ho  will 
live  long. 

64.  If  the  eyes  bo  like  the  petals  of  the  lotus,  the 

person  will  be  rich ;  and  if  the  corners  bo  x^ed,  lie  will  bo 
wealthy  and  prosperous  ;  if  of  the  color  of  honey,  lie  will 
be  exceedingly  rich;  and  if  they  resemble  the  eyes  of  the 
cat,  the  person  will  be  wicked. 

Go.  If  tho  e>*a  be  like  those  of  the  deer  or  round  or 
squint,  the  personjwill  bo  a  thief  ;  if  they  see  obliquely,  he 
will  be  wicked ;  and  if  they  be  like  the  eyes  of  the  elephant, 
the  person  will  be  a  king. 

60,  If  the  eyes  indicate  courage,  the  person  will  be 
rich;  if  they  be  of  the  color  of  tho  blue  lotus,  he  will  be 
learned  ;  and  if  the  eyes  be  exceedingly  black,  the  person 
will  become  blind- 


||  BBT  HAT  eAjtfHTTA*  [CH. 

7.  If  the  eyes  be  large,  the  person  w  ill  be  a  minister"; 
If  red-black,  be  will  be  wealthy  ;  if  they  appear  to  be  meek 
And  imploring,  the  person  will  be  poor  ;  and  if  glossy >  ho 
will  be  very  rich  and  will  live  in  comfort* 

68-  If  the  lr&iv$  be  hig'h  and  not  broad,  the  person 
yv i'll  die  early  ;  if  high  and  broad,  ho  will  live  in  comfort  ?  if 
both  brows  be  not  alike,  the  person  will  be  poor ;  and  if 
they  be  bent  like  the  young  moon,  he  will  bo  rich. 

69.  If  the  brows  be  long  and  do  not  meet,  the  person 
will  be  rich  ;  if  they  appear  broken,  lie  will  be  poor  ;  and 
if  they  bo  bent  in  the  middle,  be  will  Cohabit  with  women 
under  prohibition. 

70.  If  the  temples  be  high  and  broad,  the  person  will 
be  rich  ;  and  if  sunk,  lie  will  have  neither  sons  nor  money. 
If  the  fore-head  be  not  even,  the  person  will  be  poor  ;  and  if 
it  be  like  the  half  moon,  he  will  be  rich, 

71.  I£  the  fore-head  be  like  the  pearl  oyster  find 
broad,  the  person  will  be  a  preceptor  ;  if  covered  with 
muscles,-  he  will  be  wicked  ;  and  if  the  muscles- be  high  and 
triangular  in  shape,  he  will  be  rich. 

72.  Jf  the  fore-head  be  low,  the  person  will  be  assassi¬ 
nated  or  put  in  prison  and  will  be  addicted  to  cruel  deeds  ; 
1f  ifc  be  high,  ho  will  be  a  king  ;  and  if  narrow*  he  will  be 
poor. 

73.  If  the  weejnng  be  without  tears*  agreeable  to  the 
ear  and  not  of  an  imploring  nature,  the  person  will  be 
happy  ;  if  otherwise,  he  will  bo  miserable. 


74.  If  the  laughter  be  unattended  by  the  motion  of 
the  body,  the  person  will  be  happy  ;  if  it  be  attended  by 
the  closing  of  the  eyes,  he  will  be  wicked  ;  rf  it  bo  of  fre¬ 
quent  occurrence,  he  will  be  happy  ;  and  if  it  be  repeated  at 
the  end,  he  will  become  m ad- 

75.  If  there  be  three  long  lines  in  the  forehead,,  the 


BTM  HAT  SAM  HIT  A* 

will  live  for  1 00  years  ;  if  four  linos,  e  will  be  a 
king  and  will  lire  for  95  years. 

7(5.  If  the  lines  bo  broken,  the  person  will  cohabit 
with  a  woman  under  prohibition  ;  if  there  be  no  lines  in  the 
forehead,  he  will  live  for  90  years  ;  and  if  the  lines  be  near 
the  hair  of  the  head,  he  will  live  for  s0  years. 

77.  If  there  be  five  lines  in  the  forehead,  his  Age  will 
be  70;  if  the  lines  be  of  the  same  length,  bis  nge  will  be 
sixty  ;  if  there  be  many  linos,  the  age  will  be  50  panel  if  the 
Hues  be  bent,  it  will  be  40- 

78.  If  the  lines  in  the  forehead  be  in  contact  with 
the  brows,  the  nge  will  be  o0  ;  if  they  be  bent  on  the  left 
side,  it  will  be  20;  if  abort,  the  person  will  meet  with 
early  death.  If  the  lines  be  imperfect,  the  ago  shall  he 
ascertained  by  proportion. 

79.  If  the  head  be  round,  the  person  will  possess  many 
Cows  j  if  i t  be  broad  and  round  like  an  umbrella,  he  will  be  a 
king;  if  flat,  he  will  lose  his  parent  when  young  ;  and  if 
long,  he  will  live  long. 

80.  If  the  head  he  like  a  pot,  the  person  will  be  fond 
of  meditation  ;  if  it  appear  as  if  two  heads  were  joined  to¬ 
gether,  he  will  be  poor  and  wicked  ;  if  sunk,  he  will  be  a 
great  man  ;  aud  if  exceedingly  sunk,  he  will  meet  with 
rum. 

81.  If  the  hair  of  the  head  grow  singly,  be  glossy,  black, 
curling,  with  no  split  ends,  soft.,  and  not  too  much  in 
quantity,  the  person  will  live  in  great  comfort  or  will 
be  a  king. 

£  2.  If  the  hairs  grow  several  together  and  if  they  be 
not  of  the  same  length  or  be  of  brown  color  or  thick,  split 
at  the  ends,  not  glossy,  short,  curling  too  much  and  too 
much  in  quantity,  the  person  will  be  poor. 

8h  If  the  limbs  be  of  disagreeable  appearance  with- 


mure  at  s  a:\ih  it  a. 

^r2^4h/f  lesh  and  covered  over  witli  muscles,  the  person  wilf  Do 
mi  happy  ;  and  if  otherwise,  happy. 

81  To  be  a  king  three  places  {must  be  broad,  three 
things  must  be  deep  or  high,  six  places  high,  four  small, 
seven  red,  five  long  and  live  soft,  as  follows  ; — 

8-y.  The  breast,  the  forehead  and  the  lace  must  be  broad; 
the  navel,  the  voice  and  strength  must  be  deep  or  high. 

86.  The  breast,  arm-pit,  nails,  nose,  face  and  the  nape 
(A  the  neck  must  be  high  ;  the  penis,  the  back,  the  neck  and 
the  shanks  must  be  short. 

87.  The  corners  of  the  eyes,  soles  of  feet;  palm  of  the 
band,  the  corners  of  the  month,  the  lower  lip;  the  upper  lip 
arid  the  tongue  must  be  red.  Teeth,  fingers,  hair  of  the 
head,  the  skin  and  nails  must  be  soft  or  smooth. 

88.  The  mouth,  the  eyes,the  arms,  the  nose  and  the  part 
between  the  nipples  must  bo  long. 

II. — Comphxioiu  ( a ) 

89.  Complexion  in  man,  animals  and  birds  is  detected 
by  persons  learned  in  the  matter  and  indicate  both  good  and 
evil  and  is  like  a  lamp  placed  within  a  crystal  vessel  thrbvvr 
ing  its  light  on  the  objects  around. 

90.  The  complexion  discernible  in  shining  teeth 
fekin,  nails  and  hairs  of  the  body  and  of  the  head  will  be 
attended  with  good  smell  if  it  be  Caused  by  the  element 
of  earth.  It  will  make  the  person  happy,  rich,  prosperous 
and  virtuous. 

91.  The  complexion  which  is  glossy,  whito,  clean 
gre  m  and  agreeable  to  look  at  is  Caused  by  the  element  of 
water  ;  it  will  make  all  creatures  possessing  it  Lappy  and 
cncoessful  in  all  their  attempts  aud  will  produce  wealth, 
on i fort ,  luxury  and  piosperiiy. 

92.  The  complexion  which  indicates  fear  ;  nd  is  un«* 
(a\  Vit<  l  it*  at  i he  ad. 


SRfliiAT  SAM  HIT  A« 


<3L 


'^  i  fe^fable  and  of  the  color  of  tho  lotus,  gold  or  fire,  and  which 
also  indicates  strength,  power,  and  valor,  is  caused  by  tho 
element  of  fire, 

93.  The  complexion  which  is  dirty,  not  glossy,  black 
and  of  bad  odour  is  caused  by  the  element  of  air.  Id  will 
cause  to  the  person  death  or  imprisonment,  disease,  ruin 
and  loss  of  wealth.  The  complexion  which  is  of  the  color  of 
the  crystal,  noble,  clear  and  indicating  wealth  and  genero¬ 
sity,  is  caused  by  the  element  of  ether  (Akaa).  It  will  gi  ve  a 
person  all  that  be  desires. 

94.  Thus  lias  been  described  the  complexion  caused 
by  the  elements  of  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  arid  ak as' — live  in 
number.  Some  writers  treat  of  five  more  complexions  caused 
by  the  Sun,  Vishnu,  Indra,  Yam  a  and  tho  Moon,  and  they 
have  described  in  detail  the  properties  of  each* 

Notes. 

Physical  man  is  composed  of  the  five  elementary  pr’nci- 
pies —earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  akas.  The  lords  of  these 
are  respectively  Mercury  (earth),  Venus  and  the  Moon 
(water),  Mars  and  the  Sun  (fire),  Saturn  (air.),  and  Jupiter 
(ideas).  Human  life  is  divided,  into  a  number  of  Dasa 
periods  presided  over  by  tlm  sov  oral  planets  (vide  Chapter 
VIII  of  Brihafc  Jabaka).  In  the  period  of  a  particular 
planet  will  predominate  the  elementary  principle  belong¬ 
ing  to  him,  and  therefore  the  complexion  due  to  such  prin¬ 
ciple  will  become  discernible  in  such  Dasa  period.  Suppose 
the  Dasa  period  to  bo  that  of  Mars,  his  element  is  fire;  the 
complexion  caused  by  the  elementary  principle  of  fire  is 
described  in  stanza  93.  This  complexion  will  become  dis¬ 
cernible  in  the  Dasa  period  of  Mars;  and  so  for  tho  other 
planets.  \  -  v;.  "V  -y  \ 

Again,  in  stanza  21  of  Ch.  VEIT  of  his  Brihat  J ataW 
Varaha  Miliira  states  that  the  complexion  will  be  occowpo- 
pied  by  certain  other  qualities  duo  to  tho  five  elemental* y 


BKIHAT  SAMHJTA- 


«§L 


^^'n^J^iples  and  discernible  by  their  .respective  organs  of  sense. 
The  main  property  of  earth  is  smell,  a  quality  discernible 
by  the  nose  ;  that  of  water  is  taste  a  quality  discernible  by 
the  tongue  ;  that  m  tiro  or  light  is  slmpo  or  appearance,  dis¬ 
cernible  by  the  eye,*  that  of  the  air  is  touch,  discernible  by 
the  body  ;  and  that  oi  akas  is  sound,  discernible  by  the  car. 
Now  suppose  the  Dasa  period  to  bo  that  of  Venus.  H|$ 
clement  is  water;  the  quality  belonging  to  water  is  taste, 
discernible  by  the  tongue;  therefore  in  the  .Jjjasa  period  of 
Yenus,  t ho  person  will  eat  juicy  meals  according  to  his 
desire.  Again,  suppose  the  Dasa  period  to  be  that  of  Jupi¬ 
ter,  his  elementary  principle  is  Akas  ;  its  property  is  sound, 
discernible  by  the  ear  ;  the  person’s  speech  will  be  sweet  and 
agreeable  to  the  ear.  In  the  Di.sa  period  of  Mercury  (earth, 
smell)  I  he  person’s  body  will  bo  wit  h  an  agreeable  odour  ;  in 
the  period  of  Mars  (fire,  sight],  he  will  be  of  agreeable  appear¬ 
ance,  and  in  that  of  Saturn  (air,  touch),  he  will  be  of  soft 
body.  From  these  the  particular  Dasa  period  of  a  person 
may  be  ascertained. 

II L — Voice, 

95.  If  the  voice  bo  like  the  sound  of  the  elephant,  tho 
bull,  the  chariot,  the  drum,  the  lion  or  the  clouds,  the  per¬ 
son  will  be  a  king ;  but  if  it  be  hoarse  and  rough  like  the 
braying  of  the  ass,  the  person  will  bo  poor  and  unhappy. 

IV, -  Strength. 

96.  Strength  consists  in  seven  things — in  the  serum  of 
flesh,  the  marrow  of  bones,  the  slcin,  bones,  semen,  blood 
paid  flesh.  We  shall  now  describe  the  properties  of  each* 


97.  If  the  mouth,  lips,  gum  of  teeth,  tongue,  corners 
of  eyes,  the  anus,  iho  hands  and  feet  be  red,  the  person  is 
strong  iu  blood  ;  he  will  live  iu  comfort  aud  will  bo  married, 
wealthy  and  with  sons. 

98,  If  tho  skin  bo  glossy,  the  person  will  be  rich;  if 
of,  the  will  be  happy  and  prosperous  ;  and  if  thin,  intelligent 


BXUJIAT  SAMEfTA. 

person  will  be  rtrongin  marrow.  Ho  will  possess  a 
fair  body.  Persons  strong  in  the  serum  of  flesh  will  be  rich 
end  w  ill  have  sons, 

P9.  If  the  bones  be  large,  the  person  will  be  strong  in 
bones.  He  will  bo  strong,  learned  and  beautiful.  If  the 
somrn  be  thick  and  much  in  quantity ,  lie  will  bo  happy* 
prosperous,  learned  and  beautiful. 

100.  A  person  of  full  growth  will  bo  learned,  rich  and 
beautiful  He  will  bo  strong  in  flesh. 

T'l — Joints. 

If  the  joints  be  closo  and  well  fitted,  the  person  will 
livo  in  comfort  and.  ease. 

Vl.—$hs8. 

101.  If  the  five  paris—moutb,  tongue,  teeth,  eyes  and 
nails  be  glossy,  the  person  will  have  sons  and  will  bo  rich? 
h  qvpy  and  prosperous; .if they  bo  otherwise,  ha  will  be  poor. 

TIL— Color: 

102.  if  the  color  be  very  bright  and  glossy,  the  person 
will  be  a  king  ;  if  moderately  so,  he  will  be  wealthy  and 
will  lmvo  sons;  if  the  color  be  disagreeable  to  the  eye,  ho 
will  bo  poor;  if  of  a  single  color,  he  will  be  happy  ;  and  if 
mixed;  miserable. 

YTTL — Peculiarity  of  Charades. 

103.  The  peculiar  character  of  a  person  must  be  ascer¬ 
tained  from  his  face  :  if  the  face  be  like  that  of  the  cow, 
(  lie  ox,  the  tiger,  the  Ton  or  the  Brahmini  kite,  he  will  defeat 
Ids  enemies  be  successful  in-  fight,  and  will  become  a 


king. 

10  L  If  the  face  ho  like  that  of  the  monkey;  the  buffalo, 
the  hog  or  the  goat,  be  will  have  sons,  will  he  rich  and  will 
Vivo  ivi  comfort;  and  it  the  face  be  like  that  of  the  ass  or 
the  camel,  the  person  will  be  poor  and  unhappy. 

15 


BKHUT  SAM  RITA- 

JX- — llei'jld. 

105.  If  the  height  of  the  person  be  108,  90,  or  84  of 
his  own  inches  (breadth  of  finger),  he  is  respectively  a  supe¬ 
rior,  an  average  and  an  inferior  man. 

X— Weight. 

IOC,  It  the  weight  of  the  body  he  half  a  Mian t.  or 
gO  lbs.,  the  person  will  live  in  comfort ;  if  less,  lie  will  be 
afflicted  with  gri  f  ;  if  the  weight  be  a  bliara  (ICO  lbs),  ho 
will  be  rich  ;  and  if  it  be  a  Wmra  and  a  half  (240  lbs),  ho  will 
he  an  emperor. 

107.  The  measurement  of  both  height  and  weight  is 
to  he  token  at  the  age  of  i.0  in  the  ease  of  women  and  25  in 
the  case  of  men,  or  it  may  be  done  in  tho  last  quarter  of 

XL — Tvnato  Disposition. 

108.  Mon  is  of  the  nature  of  the  earth,  water,  fire, 
wind,  akas  (other),  the  DevftS,  the  Narns,  ortho  animals  and 
birds.  We  shall  describe  each. 

](!9.  A  person  of  tho  nature  of  earth  will  be  of  the 
odour  of  good  flowers,  will  indulge  in  sexual  intercourse, 
and  will  bo  of  good  breeding  and  of  firm  mind*  A  person 
of  the  nature  ofwater,  will  drink  much  water,  will  bo  fond 
of  women  end  will  oat  juicy  meals. 

110.  A  person  of  the  nature  of  fire  will  be  hasty  and 
thoughtless,  wicml  and  cruel,  angry,  hungry  and  glut¬ 
tonous.  A  person  of  tho  nature  of  the  wind  will  be  fickle- 
xninded,  thin  and  of  irascible  temper. 

111.  A  person  of  the  nature  of  Akas  will  bo  able, 
open-mouthed,  dialled  in  a  knowledge  of  sound  and  with 
holes  in  his  limbs.  A  person  of  tho  nature  of  the  Davos, 
will  be  liberal  in  gilts,  slightly  angry  and  attached  to  friends. 

112.  A  person  of  human  nature  will  bo  fond  of  music 
and  jewels  aud  inclined  to  share  what  ho  has  with  others. 


BUHUT  SAM  HIT  A. 

l IS.  A  person  of  the  nature  of  a  Rakshasa  will  be 
exceedingly  angry,  wicked  and  siofuK  A  person  of  tho 
nature  of  a  Pisacha  (devil)  will  bo  lmaty,  thoughtless*  dirty 
and  talkative  aud  of  a  largo  body* 

1 1 4.  A  person  of  the  nature  of  animals  and  birds 
will  be  timivb  hungry  an  l  gluttonous*  Thus  tbo  learned 
have  described  the  Sutwa  quality  of  a  mail  arid  this  quality 
is  also  known  as  Prakrit i—naturo* 

11 5-  If  t ho  gait  be  like  that  of  tbo  tiger,  tbo  swan, 
the  elephant  in  rut,  the  bull  or  the  peacock,  the  person  will 
be  a  king**  If  the  gait  be  noiseless  and  slow,  the  person 
will  be  rich  ;  and  if  it  be  fast  and  skipping,  he  will  be  poor. 

lid,  Generally,  a  person  who  1ms  opportunities  of 
walking  out  when  .suffering  from  ennui,  of  dradaug.  when, 
thirsty,  and  of  protection  when  in  four,  is  considered  by 
those  learned  in  the  loro  as  exceedingly  happy, 

117*  Thus  have  I  described  briefly  tho  features  ami 
qualities  of  man  on  examining  tho  views  of.  Kish  as.  Hu 
who  studies  this  will  bo  liked  universally  and  will  be  honor¬ 
ed  by  the  king. 


CHAPTEU  XXII.  (09). 

Ox  rrOI  FIVE  llAFTAPl/tWSHAS  O.ft  C  JIK  \T  Men. 

1.  Five  Mnh-ipmushas  or  eminent  men •  will  bo  born 
when  the  five  planets  from  Mars  to  foulrrn  arc  p-nv^rfiu 
and  occupy  their  houses,  exaltation  signs  or  the  Kendra 
houses.  I  shall  now  describe  them* 

2*  If  the  powerful  planet  be  Jupiter,  the  person  born 
is  known  as  ILimsa  ;  if  Saturn  bo  powerful,  the  person  born 
is  known  as  Saw  j  if .  Mars,  he  is  known  tls  v  c-haka;  it 
Mercury,  I10  is  known  us  Buaira ;  and  if  Venus,  he  is 
known  as  Malavya * 


EAitUT  SAMHITA. 


3.  If  the  San  be  powerful,  the  body  will  be  strong; 
and  it  the  Moon  be  powerful,  the  mind  will  bo  strong.  The 
Malmpurushas  will  be  of  the  nature  of  the  houses  occupied 
by  the  powerful  Suu  or  the  Moon. 

•4.  They  will  be  of  the  nature  of  the  houses  occupied 
by  the  powerful  Sun  or  Moon  in  point  of  gloss,  color,  shape, 
strength  and  the  like  ;  if  the  Suu  or  the  Moon  be  not  pow¬ 
erful  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  person  is  known  as  S&iikir- 
uapurusha. 

*b  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  Mars  bo  powerful,  the  per¬ 
son  will  be  very  strong;  if  Mercury  bo  powerful,  ho  will 
bo  very. heavy  ;  if  Jupiter,  ho  will  possess  a  good  voice;  if 
Venus,  ho  will  be  of  glossy  appearance  ;  and  if  Saturn  bo 
powerful,  the  person  will  be  of  good  color.  If  nono  of  the 
planets  bo  powerful,  ho  will  possess  very  little  of  the  qualities 
described  above. 

0,  The  Sankijraapuruahas  will  not  become  kings,  but 
will  enjoy  ease  and  comfort  in  the  Dusa  period  of  the  most 
powerful  planet.  Sankirnapumahas  are  of  five  sorts  accord¬ 
ing  as  the  most  powerful  planet  occupies  an  inimical-  sign, 
a  depression  sign,  a  position  beyond  the  exultation  sign  or 
hs  aspected  by  a  benefic  or  a  malefic  planet* 

7.  The  ilamsapurustia  is  93  inches  high  or  of  the 
height  of  the  length  of  the  two  arms  stretched  horizontally, 
0»ud  tho  remaining  4  persons— the  %sa,  the  Ruchaka,  the 
Bhadra*&rid  the  JMUkvya  puruahas — are  each  successively 
throe  iuches  taller  than  the  one  above  him. 


8,  If  the  S&twngana  (good  temper)  predominate  in 
a  person  he  will  be  merciful,  firm-minded,  strong,  sincere 
nnd  with  a  due  regard  for  Brahmins.  If  the  Rnjo-gana  or 
passionate  temper  predominate  in  a  person,  ho  will  bo 
&  poet,  learned  iu  the  various  arts,  will  perform  sacri- 


.]  BUI0AT  SAM0if4. 

Wi\  rites,  will  be  fond  of  women  and  will  be  bold  and 


<SL 


courageous. 


9.  If  the  Tamo-gima  or  dark  temper  predominate  in 
a  person,  lie  will  bo  deceitful,  ignorant,  idle,  angry  and 
sleepy-  If  the  three  gunas  bo  variously  mixed  in  a  person, 
there  will  bo  four  more  distinctions — or  seven  distinct  cha¬ 
racters  iu  all. 

10.  A  Mai  ary  a  purusha  will  have  arms  resembling 
the  trunk  of  tho  elephant  with  fleshy  joints,  a  smooth  and 
beautiful  body,  narrow  loins,  face  Id  inches  long)  tho  space 
between  the  root  of  tho  nose  to  tho  centre  of  the  ear  holes 
10  inches  long,  bright  eyes,  beautiful  cheek,  white  ovon 
teeth  and  tho  two  lips  without  much  flosli. 

11.  He  will  rule  over  Mahva,  Baroaob,  Burnt,  Lata, 
Sindh  and  countries  extending  to  tlia  Pariyatra  mountains 
and  will  be  master  of  much  self-earned  wealth. 

12.  He  will  live  to  the  ago  of  70  years  and  will  die 
in  water.  Thus  have  I  described  fully  the  character  of  the 
Malavya  pumslia,  and  I  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the 
character  of  the  four  other  purushaa. 

KJ.  The  Bhadra  pnruaha  has  large,  round,  equal  and 
hanging  nrras,  is  of  the  height  of  the  two  arms  stretched 
ftucl  has  cheeks  covered  with  thin,  soft  and  close  hairs. 


14.  Tho  Bhradm  purusha  will  ha  strong  in  skin  and 
semen  ;  bis  breast  will  bo  broad  and  large ;  the  Salwa- 
guna  will  predominate  in'hitn  ;  ho  will  have  the  face  of  the 
tiger  and  will  be  firm-minded,  patient,  charitable,  gruto- 
ful,  with  the  gait  of  an  elephant  and  vastly  learned. 

15.  Ho  will  be  a  mail  of  great  intelligence,  offine 
body,  forehead,  frontal  bones,  belly  and  nose;  will  bo 
learned  in  the  arts,  courageous,  with  tho  bands  and  feet  of 
the  color  of  the  inside  of  the  lotus,  will  live  in  ease  and 
comfort  aud  will  have  brows  close  aud  alike. 


IB,  The  hairs  of  his  bead  will  be  of  the  smell  of  the 
earth  just  tnade  wet,  of  fragrant  leaves,  of  saffron,  of  the 
juice  of  the  elephant  in  rut  and  of  the  fragrant  tree  of 
Aguru(a) ;  they  will  be  found  to  grow  singly  and  in  curls; 
Lis  genital  organ  will  ho  hid  from  view  like  that  of  the 
hoi  so  or  elephant. 

17.  In  his  hands  and  foot  will  lie  found  lines  of  the 
shops  of  the  plough^  the  pestle,  tho  club,  the  conch-shell, 
the  discus,  the  elephant,  tho  shark,  a  lotus  or  a  chariot. 
His  wealth  is  open  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  classes  of  peo¬ 
ple;  but  lie  will  not  help  his  own  kinsmen  and  will  over  be 
inclined  to  follow  his  own  independent  views- 

18.  Ho  will  be  84  inches  high  and  will  bo  160  lbs.  in 
weight,  and  will  rule  over  Madhyadesa.  If  three  planets 
bo  powerful  at  the  time  of  hia  birth,  he  will  rv.lo  over  all 

-  countries. 

19.  After  ruling  over  countries  acquired  by  himself, 
the  Bhadra  purusha  will  die  at  the  age  of  80  in  water  and 
will  reach  Swarga. 

20.  The  Sasa  purusha  will  have  a  slightly  uneven 
head,  small  teeth  and  nails,  projecting  eyes,  a  swift  gait, 
will  bo  skilled  iu  metallurgy  and  in  trade,  will  have  largo 
cheeks,  will  bo  deceitful,  will  be  a  commander  of  armies, 
will  be  fond  of  sexual  union,  and  will  covet  the  \v  iv.es  of  other 
men,  will  ever  be  moving,  will  bo  valiant  and  dutiful  to  Ida 
mother,  and  will  bo  food  of  forests,  mountains,  rivers  and 
places  unfrequented  byT  man. 

2  b  Ho  will  bo  92  inches  high;  will  do  deeds  with 
fpstr  and  suspicion;  will  know  the  tricks  of  other  men;  will 
bo  strong  iu  marrow;  will  bo  of  a  retiring  nature  and  will 
not  bo  very  heavy. 

22.  In  his  hands  and  feet  will  he  found  lines  of  tho 

(a) .  Amyrirf  Agaltpsha.  ^ 


imrlUT  SAHHITA- 

fo  of  tlio  target,  sword,  lyre,  cot,  garland,  drum,  trident 
as  well  as  vertical  lines. 

23.  He  will  ■either  rule  over  the  Mlechas  or  will  be  a 
provincial  governor.  TI<  will  die  at  too  age  oi  7  0  altor  Butter¬ 
ing  from  dysentery,  bally-ache,  and  personal  disgrace. 

2  &.  The  lliimsa  purnslu’s  clioek  will  bo  large  and  red  ; 
bis  nose  will  bo  high  and  face  of  the  color  ol  gold  ,'  Ida 
head  will  be  round  ;  bisoyeS  will  bo  of  brown  color;  tlio 
nails  red  :  the  lines  in  tlio  bauds  and  foot  of  the  shape  of  a 
garland,  a  string,  the  elephant  drim-V  hook  the  conch-shell, 
two  fish,  tlio  Ynpn(a),  a  pot  or  a  lotus  {lower,  the  nails  will 
be  'perfect,  the  foot  beautiful,  and  organs  of  senso  bright 
and  full. 

25.  He  will  indulge  in  water-sports,  will  be  strong  in 
semen,  will  be  1,000  pains  (ISSftte)  in  weight  and  96  inches 
iu  height. 

26.  Ho  will  rule  over  the  countries  of  Khnsa,  Snrasona 
and  Caudabar  and  the  regions  between  the  Jumna  and  the 
Ganges,  arid  will  die  in  forest  at  the  age  ol  90. 

27.  Suchaka  pnrasba  will  hay©  beautiful  brows,  and 
hairs  on  bis  head  and  will  bo  reel-black;  Ids  neck  will  be 
like  the  conch-shell  and  his  head  will  b©  long  ;  bo  will  bo 
valiant  and  cruel ;  will  be  an  excellent  minister  or  tlio  cbiof 
of  thieves  and  will  be  a  good  gymnast. 

28.  His  loirv  ;  will  be  ns  broad  as  bis  face  is  long  ;  las 
body  will  be  bright;  be  will  be  strong  in  llesh,  will  destroy 
his  enemies  and.  do  needs  iu  a  determined  manner. 

29.  The  lines  in  bis  hand  and  feet  will  be  of  the  shape 
of  a  club,  a  lyre,  a  bull,  a  bow,  a  vajrayudha,  a  spear,  the 
moon  or  the  trident ;  be  will  respect  the  Brahmins  and  the 
Havas  ;  will  bo  100  inches  high  and  1,000  palas  (80  lbs)  iu 
weight 

(u.j  Yr,p:>. ft n  eight- sided  post  in  sacrificial  rite?  to  which  tho 
animal  to  b(3  yacriiicccl  is  tied. 


BT1IHAT  SAMFTTA.. 


If- 


SO.  He  will  be  skilled  in  black  magic;  bis  shanks ami 
ankles  will  be  thin  ;  bo  will  rule  over  the  countries  bordering 
on  tbo  Viudaya  and  Sabya  mountains  and  over  Oojten,  and 
will  die  at  tlio  ago  of  70  bv  weapons  or  by  fire. 

31.  Tbo  Sankirna  purushas'  are  of  live  classes  known 
ns  tbo  Vamanakct,  the  Jnglumya,  tbo  Kuhja ,  the  Mandalahn 
ami  the  Sami :  they  will  serve  severally  under  the  five 
Malm  jmruslnis.  1  will  now  proceed  to  describe  tbem. 


32.  Tbo  Vumatiaka  pnrusba  will  .have  perfect  limbs; 
bis  back  will  1)0  bent  ;  l  is  lips,  armpits  and  body  will  bo 
btrgo  ;  be  .prill  be  a  mutt  of  renown  ;  be  will  be  generous  and 
a  worshipper  of  Vishnu,  and  be  will  servo  under  the  Bhndra 
purusba. 


33.  The  Jagbanya  purusba  will  serve  under  the  Mala- 
vva  pm  ash  a  j  bis  ears  ;\vil!  bo  semi-circular  in  'shape  ;  bis 
-joints  will  bo  strong;  bo  will  be  strong  in  semen  ;  and  will 
be  a  tale-bearer,  a  poet  of  disagreeable  appearance  and  of 
Jargo  fingers. 

34.  He  will  be  rich,  cruel  and  of  dull  intellect ;  be  will 
ridicule  other  mon  ,  the  lines  in  bis  land,  feet  and  breast  will 
be  of  the  shape  of  a  sword,  a  spear,  a  string  or  an  axe. 

37.  The  Kubja  purusba  will  serve  under  the  ITanm 
purusba;  lie  will  be  a  pure  man  ;  tbo  parts  below  bis  loins 
will  be  thin  •  the  front  part  of  his  body  will  be  bent  forward  ; 
lie  will  bo  an  atheist ;  lie  will  be  rich,  learned,  and  valiant 
will  carry  tales  and  will  be  grateful. 


36.  Ho  will  bo  learned  in  the  various  arts  and  fond 
of  fight;  bo  will  have  numerous  servants  and  will  be 
subject  to  female  influence;  he  will  give  up  bis  connection 
with  eminent  men  for  no  apparent  cause  and  will  be  of  active 
habits. 

27-  The  Mandalalnka  parushaiwill  serve  under  the 


liochaku  pnmshai  and  will  be  skilled  iu  black  magic, 
witchcraft  and  spirtloro  both  practically  and  theoretically* 


38.  He  will  appear  like  an  old  man  with  the  hair  on 
his  hea  l  stiff  and  not  glossy  ;  he  will  destory  his  enemicn 
and  be  subject  to  the  influence  of  women  ;  he  will  respect 
the  Brahmins,  the  Devas,  sacrificial  fire  ceremonies  and  the 
practice  of  yoga  and  ho  will  also  bo  intelligent. 

39.  Tho  Sami  parnsha  will  serve  under  the  S;v:a 
purusha  and  will  be  of  the  character  of  his  master;  his 
appearance  and  color  will  bo  disagreeable ;  ho  will  ho 
generous  and  will  successfully  execute  every  great  deed 
commenced  by  him, 

OHAPIS  XXMI  (70). 

On  the  Featukes  ov  Women. 

X.  He  who  wishes  to  rule  over  countries  ahull  marry 
a  woman  the  nails  of  whoso  toes  are  glossy,  high?  thin  and 
red;  whoso  ankles  are  large;  beautifvii  and  both  alike,  w  hose 
toes  are  close  and  the  soles  of  whose  feet  are  of  the  color 
of  tho  lotus- 

2.  If  tho  lines  iu  the  feet  bo  of  the  shapo  of  the  fish,.  • 
the  elephant  driver,  hook,  the  lotus,  barley-grain,  tho 
plough  or  the  sword,  or  if  the  feet  be  dry  and  soft,  if  the 
shanks  be  round  and  without  hair  and  visible  muse  I  os,  ami 

if  the  km  os  bo  fleshy  and  both  alike,  tho  woman  will  bo 

happy. 

3.  ]f  the  thighs  be  like  the  trunk  of  tire  elephant  , 
without  hair  and  firm,  the  genital  organ  bo  broad  and 
triangular  in  shape,  the  part  just  above  .it  be  largo  and  high 
and  like  the  shell  of  the  turtle,  if  the  glans  penis  be  hid 
from  view,  tho  woman  will  be  wealthy  and  happy. 

4.  If  the  buttocks  bo  largo,  broad  and  fleshy,  the 
woman,  will  wear  a  girdle  ;  if  tho  navel  oc  broad,  deep  and 
turning  from  left  to  right,  she  will  be  happy. 


BUI  MAT  SAMH5TA. 


[OB-  2*_ 


5.  If  t>l;e  abdomen  be  without  hair,  with  throe  skin 
folds,  and  if  the  bosoms  be  round,  firm,  large  and  both 
alike,  the  breast  above  H  be  without  hair  and  Soft  and  the 
neek  bo  like  the  conoh-sholl,  the  woman  will  bo  wealthy  ami 

happy. 

6.  if  the  lower  lip  he  red  like  the  China  rose,  fleshy, 
beautiful  and  red  like  the  cherry  fruit,  if  the  teeth  bo  even 
and  like  the  buds  of  jasmine,  fcho  woman  will  enjoy  tho 
pleasures  of  married  life  and  will  be  happy. 

7.  if  the  voice  be  sweet,  simple  and  not  meek  and 
like  tho  sound  of  the  cuckoo  or  the  swan,  if  tho  nose  bo 
smooth  and  beautiful  and  the  holes  alike,  and  if  the  eyes  be' 
of  ,  ho  color  of  the  leaves  of  tho  blue  lotus,  the  woman  will 
be  happy. 

8.  if  the  brows  do  not  meet  and  bo  not  very  broad,  if 
they  do  not  lmng,  if  they  be  bent  like  the  young  moon,  if 
the  forehead  be  like  the  half  moon,  without  hair  and  oven, 
the  woman  will  be  happy. 

0.  If  tho  two  ears  be  not  very  long,  be  fleshy,  soft  and 
both  alike,  and  if  the  hairs  on  the  head  be  glossy,  black,  soft, 
bent  and  grow  singly,  and  if  the  head  be  even,  the  woman 
will  bo  happy. 

10.  If  the  linos  iu  tho  hands  (cr.)  and  feet  be  of  tho 
shape  of  a  pitcher,  a  seat,  a  horse,  an  elephant,  a  chariot, 
the  bilva  tree,  aa  eight  sided  post,  an  arrow,  a  dower  wreath, 
a  pendant,  a  charnara,  an  elephant  driver’s  hook,  a  barley 
grain,  a  mountain,  flag-staff,  art  arch-way,  a  fish,  a  cross,  a 
(sacrificial  altar,  a  fan,  a  conch-shell,  an  umbrella  or  a  lotus 
flower,  tho  woman  will  become  a  queen. 

'll.  If  tho  wrists  be  invisible,  tho  hands  be  like  the 
lotus  flower  and  soft,  and  if  the  finger  joints  be  long,  tho 

(<i)  In  the  case  of  a  woman,  tlio  left  hand  and  In  the  case  of  a  man, 
tho  right  hand,  shall  be  examined. 


woman  will  become  a  queen ;  if  the  palm  of  the  hand  bo 
neither  deep,  nor  high,  if  it  be  covered  with  ben  elk  lines, 
the  woman  will  live  long,  leading  a  married  life  and  will  have 
sons ;  she  will  live  in  comfort,  bo  wealthy  and  in  the  enjoy  ¬ 
ment  of  sexual  pleasures. 

12.  If  there  bo  found  a  line  issuing  from  tho  wrist  and 
reaching  the  middle  finger,  or  if  vertical  lines  be  found  in 
tho  palm  of  the  hand,  either  tho  woman  will  become  a  queen 
or  her  husband  will  become  a  king. 

13.  If  there  be  found  a  lino  issuing  from  below  tho 
libido  finger  and  reaching  a  place  between  the  forefinger 
and  the  middle  finger,  the  woman  will  live  long  ;  if  short, 
her  age  will  be  proportionately  short. 

I  lf.  The  big  lines  below  the  root  of  tho  thumb  indicate 
sons,  and  the  small  lines  daughters.  If  the  lines  bo  perfect, 
tli©  children  will  live  long,  and  if  broken  or  short,  they  will 
die  early. 

15.  Thus  have  been  described  tho  good  features  of 
women  ;  the  bad  features  are  the  reverse  of  these.  We  shall 
however  proceed  to  state  briefly  the  more  remarkable  ones. 

16.  If  either  the  little  toe  or  tho  ono  next  to  it  do  not 
touch  the  ground, or  if  the  toe  next  to  the  big  toe  be  longer 
than  the  big  toe,  the  woman  will  become  unchaste  and  will 
commit  deeds  of  wickedness. 

17.  If  the  calves  of  the  leg  bo  found  to  grow  larger 
as  they  approach  the  knees,  or  if  the  shauks  be  covered  with 
muscles,  without  flesh  or  with  too  much  flesh  or  covered  with 
hair,  if  the  genital  organ  be  sunk,  small,  with  tho  hair 
growing  from  right  to  left,  if  the  belly  be  like  a  pot,  she 
will  suffer  grief. 

18.  If  the  neck  be  short,  the  woman  will  be  poor;  if 
very  long,  her  family  will  perish.;  and  if  large  she  will  be 
of  angry  temper. 


BBIHAT  SAmHITA. 


[oh. 


19  If  the  eyes  bo  wild  mid  disturbed  and.  of  yellow 
color,  or  if  they  be  brown  and  of  wandering  look.,  or  if  dimples 
appear  in  the  cheeks  while  laughing,  the  woman  will  become 
unchaste. 

20.  If  the  forehead  be  low,  the  brother  of  the  woman’s 

hpsband  will  die;  if  the  b<  hang,  her  fathor- 

in-l.aw  will  die;  if  the  briitooks  be  found  to  hang,  her  husband 
will  die  ;  if  the  upper]  ip  bo  covered  with  lmir  or  if  the 
woman  be  toiler  than  her  husband,  she  will  suffer  miseries. 

21.  IE  I  lie  bosoms  bo  covered  with  hair,  or  if  they  bo 
not  of  bright  appearance,  or  if  they  lie  too  large,  or  if  the 
oars  be  not  both  alike,  the  woman  will  suffer  grief.  If  the 
teeth  bo  large,  uneven  and  of  disagreeable  appearance, 
if  the  gum  ho  black,  she  will  suffer  miseries  and  be  addicted 
to  thieving. 

22.  If  the  lines  in  tho  hands  be  of  the  shape  of  a 
hawk,  a  wolf,  a  crow,  a  heron,  a  serpent,  an  owl,  or  if  the 
hands  appear  dried  up,  covered  with  nmscles  and  bpth  not 
alike,  tho  woman  will  bo  poor  and  miserable. 

23  If  the  upper-] ip  be  high,  if  tho  front  lock  be  of 
disagreeable  appearance,  the  woman  will  bo  quarrelsome; 
.Generally  vice  follows  deformity  and  virtue  follows  beauty. 


24.  The  (l)  feet  and  ankles,  (2)  tho  shanks  and  knees, 
3)  the  thighs  and  genital  organ,  (4)  the  Joins  and  the 
navel,  (5)  the  belly,  (6)  the  breast  and  the  bosoms,  (7)  tho 
shoulders  (  8)  the  neck  and  the  lips,  (9)  the  eyes  and  the 
brows,  and  (10)  the  forehead  and  the  head  represent  tho 
ton  dasa  periods  beginning  from  birth;  so  that  if  a  particular 
organ  be  defective,  a  person  will  suffer  meseries  in  the  dasa 
pedrlod  represented  by  it.  If  the  organ  be  perfect  and 
beautiful,  he  will  be  happy  during  such  period. 


imiHAT  SAMHH'A. 

Notes. — 120  Years  is  iho  maximum  length  of  life  and 
eaoh  dasa  period  consists  of  12  years.  If,  fin*  instance, 
there  be  defects  in  the  thighs,  the  person  will  suffer  miseries 
between  the  ages  of  24*  and  o0. 


CHAPTFE  XXIY  (71.) 

On  Injuries  to  Garments. 

j.  "Divide  the  garment  into  nine  rectangles  by  lines 
joining  the  opposite  points  of  triseclion  of  the  sides.  The 
Dovas  occupy  the  four  rectangles  at  the  confers.  The 
Nuras  (men)  occupy  the  two  middle  squares  at  the  two  ends, 
and  tiro  Astras  occupy  the  three  remaining  central  squares- 
The  same  remarks  apply  to  seats  and  shoes. 

2.  If  the  inner  garment  bo  new,  and  if  it  bo  disfigured 
with  ink,  dung,  mud  and  the  like,  or-  if  it  be  cut,  burnt  or 
torn,  the  effects  whether  good  or  bad  will  fully  cor.no  to 
pass,  if  the  injured  garment  be  one  that  lias  been  used, 
the  effects  will  be  slightly  felt,  if  the  garment  be  a  decayed 
one,  the  effects  will  bo  very  slightly  felt.  If  the  outer 
garment  be  injured,  the  effects  will  be  greatly  feh. 

2.  If  the  injury  occur  to  an  Asura  part,  the  person, 
will  either  suffer  from  diseases  or  will  die ;  if  it  occur  to  a 
human  part,  there  will  be  birth  of  sous  and  an  improved 
appearance  of  the  body ;  if  it  occur  to  a  Divine  part,  there 
will  bo  an  increase  of  comfort-  Generally,  if  the  injury  occur 
about  the  edges,  there  will  be  misery. 


4.  If  the  cut  appearing  in  the  divine  parts  of  a  garment 
be  of  the  shape  ofahoron,  a  duck,  an  owl,  a  dove,  a  crow,  a 
hawk,  a  jackal,  an  ass,  a  camel,  or  a  snake,  there  will  bo 
danger  to  the  life  of  the  person. 

5-  If  the  cut  in  the  Asura  part  of  the  garment  be  of 
the  shape  of  an  umberella,  a  banner,  a  cross,  a  platter,  a 


Bit  MAT  SAM  I IIT  A. 


Bit  MAT  SAMIITI'A.  [Clf,  24 

brlva  tree,  a  pot,  a  lotus  flower,  ft  flower  wreath,  and 
the. like,  the  person  will  soon  become  wealthy  and  pros* 
porous. 

0.  If  a  new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  tl.vo 
asterism ol  Aswini,  the  person  will  get  more  garments  ;  if  it 
be  worn  when  the  Moou  is  in  the  naterism  of  Bharani,  lie 
will  be  robbed  of  property  ;  if  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
astorism  of  Krifctika  there  will  be  fear  from  destructive  fires  ; 
If  when  in  the  astorism  of  Rohini,  there  will  be  acquisition 
of  wealth. 


7.  If  a  new  garment  bo  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
asfcevism  of  Mrigasiivsha,  there  will  be  suffering  from  rata; 
or  Ardra,  the  person  will  dio  ;  of  Punarvasu,  there  will  be 
prospo.ity  ;  if  in  that  of  Pushy  a  there  will  bo  acquisition 
of  wealth. 


8.  If  a  new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
astorism  of  Aslcsha  .  there  will  bo  loss  ;  of  Magha,  there  will 
be  death  ;  of  Poorvaphalguni,  there  will  fee  fear  from  the 
king  ,  of  U-Phalguni,  there  will  be  acquisition  of  wealth- 
9-  If  a  new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
nst  or  ism  of  Hasta,  there  will  be  success  in  works  undertaken  ; 
of  Ohittni,  there  will  bo  prosperity ;  of  Swaiy,  there  will  he 
prosperity  and  good  meals  ;  of  Visakba,  there  will  be 
popularity. 


10.  If  a  new  garment  be  wore  when  the  Moon  is  in 
the  nsterism  of  Anuradlin,  there  will  be  acquisition  of 
friends;  of  Jyeshttha,  the  person  will  get  more  garments. 
of.Moola,  there  will  be  death  by  drawing  or  seavoyage  ;  of 
I*  A  shad  ha,  there  will  bo  disease. 


11.  If  a  new  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in 
t  he  nsterism  of  U-Aehadhn,  the  person  will  get  good  meals  ; 
of  Sravuna,  there  will  be  eye  disease  ;  of  Srayishtha,  thero 


will  be  acquisition  of  grain  ;  of  Satabbishak,  there  will  be 
much  fear  from  poison. 


12.  If  anew  garment  be  worn  when  the  Moon  is  in  the 
astevism  of  P.  Ihmhtapada,  there  will  bo  fear  of  death  by 
drowning  ;  of  IT-  Prosh  tapada,  the  person,  will  get  sons;  of 
Revati,  there  will  bo  acquisition  of  gems. 

13  &  14.  A  new  garment  presented  by  Brahmins  with 
their  benedictions  or  by  the  king  for  merit  or  on  occasions 
of  marriage,  may  be  worn  irrespective  of  the  position  of  the 
Moon  in  the  lunar  Zodiac  and  the  effects  will  always  be  good 
Notes. — If  the  injured  garments  be  very  valuable 
Bilks  and  the  like,  the  effects  described  will  occur  after 
threo  or  si's:  years  jin  the  case  of  woollen  shawls,  after 
three  years  ;  and  in  the  case  of  ordinary  garments  after 
six  months.  According  to  Garga  whether  the  injury  occur 
to  valuable  or  ordinary  garments,  there  shall  bo  a  reci¬ 
tation  of  Vedic  hymns  by  the  Brahmins;  in  the  case  of 
tom  garments,  the  evils  cannot  be  escaped  by  the  sale  of 
the  garments  ;  they  should  be  given  away  to  Btalnnins  with 
gold,  in  which  case,  a  person  becomes  freed  from  evils. 

CHAPTER  XXV  (72). 

On  Chamara  (a). 

1.  Expressly  for  the  uso  made  of  their  tail  tho 
Chnmari  deer  (Bos  Gfrnuniens,  appears  to  have  been  creat¬ 
ed  in  the  caves  of  the  Himalayas,  the  hair  growing  at  the 
end  of  their  tail  is  either  white  or  black  or  yellow. 

t.  If  the  hair  bo  glossy,  much  in  quantity,  soft, 
pure,  white,  and  with  a  small  bone  at  the  root,  the 
Cham  ira  is  one  of  a  superior  kind  ;  bub  if  tho  hair  be  knotty, 
split,  broken  or  small  in  quantity,  the  Chamara.  will  not 
conduce  to  prosperity. 

(a).  The  bushy  tail  of  the  Bos  Grunnkns  used  ns  a  fan  and  as  one 
°f  the  insignia  of  royalt  y. 


‘  •  $  wmu^w v: 


niiKIAT  SAMHITA. 


[CH.  20. 


3.  Tbo  length  of  tho  handle  shall  be  father  a  cubit 
and  a  half  or  a  cubit  or  •  lorn*  inches  less  than  a- cubit.  •  It; 

/  d:,  *  ,  i'cj  (  1  r,  f  J  |||i  y,  o^(|  .  ?'  l^MQ  1  i 

shall  be  utudo  of  wood  and  covered  with  gold  or  silver  set 
with  gemsf  and  precious  stones.  Such  a  Ghana  ara  will 
conduce  to  the  prosperity  of  the  king. 

4.  The  beam  or  the  shaft  or  the  handle,  as  the  ease 
of  the  lute,  the  umbre lla,  tl  e 

hook,  the  cane,  the  bow.  the  canopy,  shall  be  yellow.*  red, 
of  the  color  of  the  honey,  and  black  in  the  case  of  the 
Brahmins,  ivshatryns,  Vysias  and  Sad  rad  respectively. 

5.  If  the  handle  contain  two,  four,  six,  eight,  ten  or 
twelve  joints,  the  effects  will  respectively  be  the  death  of 
a  person's  mother,  loss  of  lands,  of  wealth  and  of  family, 
disease  or  death* 

6.  ff  the  handle  contain  three,  five,  seven,  nine,  eleven, 
or  thirteen  joints,  the  effects  will  respectively  be  success 
fa  the  object  of  a  journey,  rain  of  the  enemy,  much  gain, 
acquistion  of  lands,  increase  of  cows  or  the  gain  of  a 
desired,  object. 


CHAPTER  XXVI.  (7b). 

On  Umbrellas. 

1  &  2.  The  king’s  umbrella  shall  bo  made  of  the 
feathers  of  the  swan,  the  gallineous  fowl;  tho  peacock  and 
the  crane,  covered  with  a  now  white  silk  and  hung  with  lines 
of  pearls  all  round;  the  handle  shall  be  set  with  crystal; 
the  shaft  shall  be  6  cubits  long,  tha.de  of  gold,  and  shall 
contain  seven  or  nine  joints. 

3.  Tho  length  of  tho  radius  of  the  umbrella  shall  bo 
half  tho  length  of  the  shaft :  tho  several  joints  shall  bo 
firm,  and  the  umbrella  shall  be  raised  at  the  centre ;  such 
an  umbrella  will  bring  to  tho  king  success  and  prosperity. 


BUTHAT  SA31H1TA. 


1  2D 


) 


4  The  umbrellas  of  the  first  prince,  the  queen,  the 
commander-in-chief,  and  the  magistrate,  shall  have  shafts  fi| 
cubits  long,  and  shall  be  2f  cubits  broad. 

5-  The  umbrellas  to  be  used  by  the  king's  favourites 
shall  be  made  of  the  feathers  of  the  peacock  with  its  top 
adorned  with  the  prasada  pafcta  and  shall  be  hung  with 
linos  of  pearls  all  round.  The  other  umbrellas  shall  consist 
of  four  sides,  and  the  shaft  of  the  um  brella  of  the  Brahmins 
shall  be  round. 


ON  MATTERS  CONNECTED  WITH  TOWN  LIFE. 


f. 


CHAPTER  XX'/ir.  (70 

Ok  the  praise  of  Women. 

1*  In  a  country  acquired  by  a  king  by  conquest  the 
town  is  tho  most  important  place  ,*  in  towns,  bouses  are 
important  places;  iu  houses,  the  bed  room  is  au  important 
place,  in  it,  the  cot  and  the  bed  are  important,  and  on  it 
a  woman  bedecked  with  jewels  forms  the  essence  of  the 
pleasures  of  royalty. 

2  G  ons  derive  beauty  from  women;  women  derive 
no  beauty  from  gems  ;  for,  women,  when  without  gems,  am 
lovely  and  provoke  men’s  desires,  and  not  so  gem  a  when 
alone. 


3.  To  kings  struggling  to  conceal  their  desires  when 
in  public,  anxious  to  conquer  their  enemies,  meditating  on  a 
hundred  schemes  of  administration  either  half  executed  or 
not  attempted  at  all,  obl  iged  to  follow  the  advice  of  their 
ministers,  ever  suspecting  fear  and  failure  in  every  attempt 
and  buried  in  a  sea  of  cares  and  anxieties,  the  embrace  of 
ar<  excellent  woman  is  the  only  bit  of  pleasure  falling*  to 
their  lot. 


17 


liKITlAT  JAMlU't  A  • 


[CH  27 


4.  In  no  world  has  Bra  Inn  a  created  a  gom  superior 
to  -women,  whose  speech,  sight/ touch,  thought,  provoke 
pleasmahlo  sensations.  Such  a  gem  in  the  shape  of  a 
rvonutn  is  the  fruit  of  a  person’s  good  deeds,  and  from  such 
a  gem  a  person  obtains  both  sons  and  pleasure.  A  woman 
therefore  resembles  the  goddess  of  wealth  in  a  family,  and 
must  bo  treated  with  respect,  and  all  her  wants  must  bo 
mi  i  /  tied 

5.  It  appears  to  me  that  those  are  bad  men  who,  out 
of  a  dislike  for  all  things,  speak  ill  of  women,  and  these  men 
are  hover  found  to  speak  of  the  virtues  of  women. 

6.  Is  there  any  vice  with  which  women  are  not 
charged  by  men  ?  Speak  the  truth.  Those  that  reject 
women  do  so  out  of  a  stupid  firmness  of  mind.  According 
to  Mann,  women  possess  more  virtues  than  men. 

7.  Sotna-deva  has  blessed  women  with  personal 
purity  (a)  ;  the  Gandhevvns  have  given  them  pure  speech  ; 
Agni-deva  has  allowed  to  them  the  privilege  of  eating  any 
kind  of  food  without  restrictions.  Women  are  therefore 
without  faults. 

8.  The  Brahmins,  are  pure  in  their  feet  (/>) ,  the  cows, 
in  their  buttocks;  the  sheep  and  the  horse,  in  their  lace. 


and  women  all  over  their  body. 

9.  Women  are  exceedingly  pure  and  are  without 
faults.  These,  (c)  if  any,  leave  them  with  their  menses. 

10.  Those  houses  will  meet  with  ruin  ns  if  by  witch¬ 
craft,  which  are  cursed  by  women  who  are  not  treated  with 
respect- 


(o)  and  (&).  Tho  iderrid  "one  somewhat  foreign  to  foreigners.  A 
pure  part  in  one  the  touch  of  which  does  not  pollute  a  person  though  the* 
part  may  suffer  pollution. 

(r)  The  Commentator  interprets  “  these”  to  mean  faults  of  the 
mind.  Aa  regards  faults  of  the  body,  expiatory  ceremonies  avo  prescribed 
iu  the  Sbastiras. 


,  £7.J  i'RrriAi  sAMuxrA, 


'm 

m 


I).  The  Shastras  say  that,  a  woman  ia  both  a  man’s 
wife  and  mother  (a),  and  men  owe  their  birth  to  women 
Those  that  speak  ill  of  women  therefore  are  ungrateful 
persons.  How  can  you  people  bo  happy  1 

12.  In  the  eye  of  ibo  Shastras,  adultery  in  man  cm 
woman  is  equally  condemned*  Man  neglects  this  con¬ 
demnation,  while  women  respect  it.  Hence  tho  superiority 
women  over  men. 

18,  According-  to  the  Shastras  a  man  that  commits 
adultery  shall  dress  himself  in  the  skin  of  tho  ass  with  tho 
hairy  side  without,  and  beg  his  meals  for  six  months  for  his 
purification. 

Id,,  Though  one  might  indulge  in  sexual  pleasures 
for  100  years,  tho  appetite  for  the  same  is  not  satiated. 
Whenever  men  refrain  from  sexual  pleasures  after  the  death 
of  their  wives,  they  do  so,  because  of  their  inability  ,■  while 
women  after  tho  death  of  their  husbands  boldly  preserve 
their  chastity,  continuing  in  a.  state  of  widowhood. 

15-  A  man  who  blames  a  faultless  woman  is  not 
unlike  a  thief  who,  suspecting  an  innneont  person  to  bo  a 
thief,  sets  up  a  hue  and  cry* 


10.  A  man  when  alone  with  his  wife  speaks  to  her 
sweet  language  and  no  movo  thinks  of  her  after  her  death  ; 
while  a  woman  often  enters  the  funeral  pile  along  with  her 
.licensed  husband  out  of  her  love  for  him. 

17.  A  person  who  is  fortunate  enough  to  have  an 
excellent  wife,  though  ho  might  bo  poor,  appears  to  me  as 
happy  as  a  king.  The  main  pleasures  of  a  king  are  women 
and  good  meals.  These  serve  as  sticks  to  increase  the  lire 
of  bis  desires. 

.vp.  The  id  fa  is  that  a  person  is  born  over  again  in  tho  shape  of  his. 


own  ion. 


5  ‘TvTO.-'uvW  ^  "  rj' 


11RIHAT  SA-vreri’A. 


[on.  2 


1 'S'.  Tli ah  a  pleasure  like  that  of  embracing  n  woman 
who  has  just  attained  womanhood,  whose  speech  is  short, 
soft,  sweet  and  broken,- whoso  bosoms  are  high  and  large, 
nod  who  herself  is  full  of  sexual  passion,  is  not  to  be  found 
in  the  house  of  Brahma,  the  Creator  is  iny  opinion. 

19.  lu  the  Brahma  loka,  the  Munis,  the  oiddhas,  the 
Celestial  mucisians  may  pay  due  honors  to  persons  deserv¬ 
ing  their:  What  pleasures  cap  there  be  in  receiving  such 
honors  ?  'J  h  >se  personscaunofc  bo  as  happy  ns  those  who 
trijoy  excellent  women. 

20.  From  Bral  una  down  to  worms,  we  find  pairs 
indulging  in  sexual  love-  What  is  there  to  be  ashamed  of 
in  the  matter — one  for  which  fcbo  Supremo  Siva  assumed 
four  faces  (a). 


n. 

CHAPTER  XXVJII.  (75). 

Oi\  Amiability. 

i  A  man  of  agreeable  manners  enjoys  sexual  plea¬ 
sures  fully  and  not  so  one  of  a  morose  nature;  for  he  can¬ 
not  secure  the  love  ol  women.  A.  woman,  though  at  a  dis¬ 
tance,  conceives  a  child  ol  the  shape  of  the  person  she  loves 
ardently  and  thinks  of  at  the  time. 

2.  Just  in  the  same  way  as  a  tree  that  grows  is  not 
different  from  the  parent  tree,  whether  we  plant  a  branch 
or  sow  a  seed,  so  the  main  features  of  the  child  partake  of 
the  features  of  its  father,  though  there  might  bo  slight 
changes  due  to  the  soil. 

(a).  The  allusion  is  to  a  visit  paid  to  Siva  by  Tilottnma,  a  dancing 
woman,  attached  to  the  Court  of  Tnclra.  As  sho  went  round  Siva  by  way 
of  worship,  he  was  so  nmoli  at  t  racted  by  her  beauty  that  lie  kept  looking 
at  uei  w ith  lour  faces  winch  lie  assumed,  while  his  ono  face  was  directed  to¬ 
wards  bis  consort  Parrot  i  whom  he  did  not  wish  to  offend. 


*  *w«es^ 


3.  The  si  btlo  soul  co-operates  with  the  mitm*  (the 
mind) ;  the  mind,  co-operates  with  the  senses ;  the  senses, 
perceive  objects;  all  this  takes  place  in  little  or  no  tune- 
The  above  is  the  connection  between  the  soul  and  the 
objects  around  us.  What  is  there  which  the  mind  cannot 
Comprehend  ?  Therefore,  wherever  iho  mind,  enters,  the 
soul  follows  it. 

4.  The  soul  being  subtle  whenever  it  enters  another 
soul,  it  requires  some  time  and  an  effort  of  the  mind  to 
know  tho  latter.  The  soul,  which  intensely  meditates  on 
an  object,  assumes  the  shape  of  that  object,  and  therefore 
young  women’s  thoughts  are  always  directed  towards  amia¬ 
ble  persons. 

5.  Beal  love  makes  one  beloved  of  others,  and  hatred 
makes  a  person  unpopular-  There  is  great  sin  attaching 
to  attempts  at  winning  the  favor  of  a  person  by  tho  practice 
of  magic  or  the  use  of  drugs  o;*  by  stratagems,  and  no  plea¬ 
sure  can  come  out  of  it. 

6.  A  person  who  is  not  selfish  becomes  popular  and 
selfishness  makes  a  man  unpopular.  A  selfish  person 
executes  his  work  with  much  difficulty,  and  an  unselfish 
man  through  his  sweet  manners  and  speech  finds  it  easy  to 
do  his  work,  being  helped  by  others. 

7.  It  is  not  manly  in  a  person  thoughtlessly  to 
attempt  to  do  ft  thing  or  to  utter  falsehood  with  a  view  to 
please  others.  A  person  who,  even  while  m  ■ceossfully 
executing  a  business,  does  not  feel  proud  nor  indulge  in 
selfish  praise  is  truly  noble. 

d.  A  person  who  desires  to  become  a  general  favorite 
shall  speak  of  tho  merits  of  other  men  in  terms  of  praise, 
and  a  person  who  speaks  of  the  demerits  of  other  men 
becomes  wicked  himself. 


T!;>i ji'ii  '''. 

i 


BlUUAT  SAMiiri’A. 


V>.  All  men  wish  to  help  a  person  who  aims  at  the 
people.  The  renown  which  n  person  will  derive 
It’orn  ao  act  of  assistance  to  li is  enemy  when  in  difficulties 
’•s  ,l  fortune  resulting  from  numerous  good  deeds. 


10.  Where  there  are  /eat  merit?,  the  attempt  to  sup¬ 
press  them  only  increase!  i  their  splendour  just  like  on 
attempt  bo  suppress  flaming  fire  by  means  of  dry  grass-  A 
person  who  out  of  envy  aims  at  ruining  the  reputation  of 
other  then  is  hated  by  all. 


rn. 

CHAPTER  XXIX.  (76 > 

Off  SrfiKStAMC  D&uos  and  Medictnks. 


1  •  If  the  blood  should  exceed,  the  issrfe  will  be,  a  fern  a  To 
child  ;  if  the  semen  virile  should  exceed,  the  issue  will  be  a 
male  child ;  if  both  V©  equal,  the  issue  will  be  a  hermaphro¬ 
dite.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  take  medicines  for  the 
increase  of  tho  semen  virile. 

2.  The  tops  of  storied  houses,  moon-light,  sweet  liquor, 
beautiful  women  with  the  passion  of  love,  the  music  of  tho 
bite,  love  speech,  soli  hide,  and  flower  wreaths,  are  things 
whose  union  provokes  sexual  passion. 


3.  Prepare  a  mixture  of  Maksika  Dhaiu,  (a)  honey, 
parach.,  (quick-silver),  iron-dust,  Patthya,  bitumen,  vidanya 
and  ghee.  Take  this  for  21  days.  Though  dO  years  old 
and  weak  with  age,  you  will  indulge  in  sexual  union  with 
the  energy  of  a  young  man. 


(«).  Fi'<?ri  glossary  at  the  end  of  Chapter  77  for  an  explanation  c.f  tho 
various  medical  and  botanical  terms  occurring  in  this  and  in  the  next 
chapter. 


BTCITI  VT  SAMfftTA. 


I8f> 


Note.~- With' (lie  exception  of  hoaey  aud  ghee,  the  other 
drugs  shall  he  powdered  and  mixed  iu  equal  parts  and 
formed  into  a  paste  with  honey  and  milk. 

4  Put  into  the  milk  of  tho  cow,  the  mot  of  the  /aim: 
hacchu  and  heat  the  milk  and  then  drink  it;  or  roast  a 
quantity  of  broken  black-gram  in  the  ghee  obtained  by 
churning  pure  uuettrcUed  milk.  Eat  0  handfuls  of  the  scud 
and  then  drink  milk.  You  will  engage  in  sexual  union 
with  great  energy, 

5.  Soak  in  the  juice  of  the  pumpkin  its  powderd  root 
and  dry  it  .;  repeat  the  operation  7  times.  Put  the  powder 
into  milk  heated  with  sugar,  and  drink  it.  You  will  require 
many  women. 

6.  Soak  in  tho  juice  of  the  fruit  of  the  Emblic  Myro- 
bolam  its  dried  fruit  powdered  and  dry  it.  Repeat  the 
operation  7  times;  mix  it  with  honey,  sugar  and  ghee,  and 
lick' it  and  drink  milk.  You  will  require  many  women. 

7.  Put  in  to  the  milk  of  the  cow  the  testicle  of  the  goat, 

#  , 

heat  the  milk,  soak  in  it  a  considerable  quantity  of  sesan.um 
seeds,  and  dry  it;  repeat  the  operation  7  times  ;  cat  the 
seeds.  You  will  outbeat  the  sparrow  in  sexual  union. 

8.  Mix  with  the  cooked  Shastyka  rice  tho  cooked 
broken  seeds  of  black  gram ;  cat  the  rice  and  then  ch  ink 
milk;  you  will  go  to  bed  with  much  sexual  passion. 


9.  Mix  together  equal  quantities  of  the  powder  or 
the  flour  of  sesamum  seeds,  of  the  root  of  tho  Asvogaudlm, 
of  %pibacchu,  tho  pumpkin  and  of  the  Shashi tka  rice. 
Purih  the  mixture  into  a  paste  by  adding  the  milk  of  the 
goat  aud  make  cakes  of  it,  roast  them  iu  heated  ghee  hud 
eat  tho  cakes ; 


Wim" 


BRI HAT  SAMH1TA- 


[oh>  291 


10  Or,  put  into  the  milk  of  the  cow  the  root  of  either 
of  Gokshura  or  the  pumpkin;  lieat  the  milk,  and  drink  it ; 
though  old  you  will  indulge  in  sexual,  union  with  the 
energy  of  a  young  man.  We  will  now  proscribe  remedies 
for  dyspepsia. 


]  '].  Mix  together  equal  quantities  of  the  powder  of 
sison,  rock-salt,  Kuril aki,  ginger,  and  long  pepper,  and 
put  the  mixture  either  in  liquor  or  in  butter-milk  or  water, 
slightly  heated  and  drink  it.  You  will  begin  to  have  a 
keen  appetite  for  food. 

12.  If  while  taking  the  cordials  described  above  yon 
oat  with  your  rice  touch  of  vegetable  preparations  which 
are  exceedingly  sour,  bitter,  saltish  or  pungent  you  will, 
though  youug,  lose  your  sexual  energy  and  like  an  old  per¬ 
son  state  false  excuses  before  womou. 


Notes : — The  following  is  extracted  from  a  medical  work 
named  Katnakosa. 

1.  Soak  in  the  water  of  the  coconnut  the  broken  seeds 
of  black-gram  j*hd  dry  the  seeds,  repeat  the  operation  7  times; 
make  the  seeds  into  a  paste  by  grinding,  make  cakes  of  it 
and  roast  them  in  heated  ghee  and  eat  the  cakes  and  then 
drink  milk;  you  will  require  a  hundred  women. 

The  following  are  taken  from  a  work  named  Pm yoga 
Bara : — 

2.  Mix  together  in  an  iron  vessel  filled  with  ghee 
equal  quantities  of  grapes,  Makshikadhatu,  Silajit,  quick¬ 
silver,  the  excrement  of  the  turtle  dove,  Vidanra  and 
Haritaki  powdered  ;  take  a  close  of  the  mixture  every 
morning;  you  will  become  strong  and  healthy  and  v ill  bo 
freed  from  poison  and  from  jaundice,  and  will  havb  an 
increase  of  semen  virile. 


liP.IIUT  3  AM  Hi]' A. 


3.  Mix  together  the  powder  of  Triphala  with.  ©it. 
jaggory  or  sugar,  eat  the  mixture  and  drink  pa  ilk  hesttv 
with  the  root  of  Kapikacchu  mixed  with  it ;  yen  will  have 
an  increase  of  semen  virile. 

4.  Mix  together  the  milk  of  the  cow  with  the  juice  of 
the  bark  of  the  silk-cotton  troe$  heat  the  mixture  till  it  is 
reduced  and  to  one-half  of  its  bulk.  Mix  with  it  ppe~thml 
part  of  honey.  A  woman  who  takes  a  karsha  (one-fourth  pala) 
of  this  milk  will  have  an  increase  of  blood. 

-  .iV^.  .  ' 

5.  There  will  also  be  an  increase  of  blood  if  a  woman 
will  take  dried  grapes  ground  with  honey  on  a  stone  and 
then  mixed  with  either  milk  or  gruel.  i  ; ; 


0.  .There  will  also  be  an  increase  of  blood  if  tbe  juice 
of  the  bark  of  the  mango  bo  drawn  into  the  nose. 

The  following  are  from  Susrufca: — • 

7.  Form  into  a,, paste  either  a  mixture  of  the  powder 
of  sesarnura  seeds,  black-gram,  and  the  root  of  the  pumpkin, 
or  the  flour  of  the  Sali  rice,  by  grinding  it  on  a  stone  with 
the  juice  of  the  sugarcane  and  mix  with  it  rock  salt  and 
the  serum  of  flesh  of  the  hog;  form  cakes  of  it  ;  roast  them 
in  heated  ghee,  and  eat  the  cakes  ;  you  will  respire  a 
hundred  women. 

8-  Put  into  milk  the  testicle  of  the  goat;  heat  the 
milk;  drench  in  it  sesamum  seeds  7  times,  drying  them  each 
time  ;  mix  with  them  the  serum  of  flesh  of  the  gangetic 
porpoise;  make  cakes  of  the  mixture  and  roast  them  in  ghuo 
and  eat  the  cakes;  yon  will  require  a  hundred  women 


9.  Mix  together  long  peeper,  rock  salt,  and  the  testicle 
of  the  goat;  form  the  mixture  into  cakes  and  i-onst  thorn  iu 
ghee  obtained  from  uneurdhd  milky  eat  the  cakes.  You 
will  ‘  oi mire  a  hundred  women 


18 


‘-'Vr  •  •;  • 


MJI.'VT  S  VMIUTA. 


m. 


v 


10.  Form  a  mixture  of  the  powder  of  equal  quantifies 
•A  c-i  (her  long  pepper,  black-gram  and  Sail  rice,  or  of  barley 
and  wheat;  form  the  mixture  into  cakes,  roast  them  in  ghee; 
eat  the  cakes  and  then  drink  milk  mixed  with  sugar  and 
boated.  You  wilt  requiro  ten  women, 

11;  Drench  in  the  juice  of  the  pumpkin  its  powdered 
root  7  times,  drying  the  powder  each  time  |  add  to  i  t  ghae, 
and  honey  and  eat  it  ;  you  will  requiro  10  women. 

Vi  U  #  i  t  p!/’  ,,  .  '•  *  .  i  *  \v  i  r  wH:  <W ,  j  <>l  r  D 1, 

12.  Drench  7  times  in  the  juice  of  the  fruit  of  etnblic 
myrobolan  the  powder  of  its  dried  fruit,  drying  the  powder 
each  time;  mix  with  it  ghee,  honey,  and  sugar  and  eat  it 
and  then  drink  milk.  Though  you  may  be  80  years  old 
you  will  begin  to  possess  the  energy  of  a  young  man. 

13.  Mix  together  long  pepper,  rook  salt,  and  tbo  testi¬ 
cle  of  the  goat ;  put  the  mixture  in  ghee,  heat  it  and  eat  it. 
You  will  have  an  increase  of  semen  virile.  The  testicles  of 
the  G-ungetic  porpoise,  the  crab,  the  turtle,  or  tbo  crocodile 
may  q©  similarly  mixed  with  the  other  ingredients.  Tbo 
c  fleet  will  be  the  same. 

N* 

'  .  hd;.  Drink*  the  semen  virile  of  tbo  buffalo,  tbo  ox,  or 

the  sheep  ; 

15.  Or  put  into  milk 'the  fruit,  root,  hark  and  tbo 
calyx  of  the  young  buds  of  Aswattha  (the  holy  fig  tree); 
beat  the  milk,  add  to  it  honey  anil  sugar ;  drink  the  milk. 
You  will  outbeat  the  sparrow- 

1 6.  Mix  well  with  honey  and  ghee  a  pal  a  of  tbo 
flonv’  of  black-gram  and  eat  tire  mixture. 

.  1  7.  Put  into  milk  the  root  of  the  Kupikacehu  and  the 
dour  of  .wheat ;  beat  the  milk  ;  as  soon  as  it  cools  add  t  o  it 
ghee,  and  drink  it,  and  the*  drink  ordinary  milk. 


'0/  o 


0  1 


■  3BIHAT  SAJ1HITA. 


m 


18.  Put  into  gheo  the  testicle  of  tho  crocodile  or  tiro 
rat  or  the  frog  or  the  sparrow  ,•  heat  iho  ghee  and  rub  it  oil 
fcl,o  Solos  of  tire  foot.  You  -will  enjoy,  as  many  women  as 
you  please  as  long  as  you  do  nob  set  you)'  foot  ou  the 


•  19.  Mix  with  sugar  the  powder  ot  the  seeds  of  the 
fCapi.kacpTiu  and  Ikshmvaka,  Put  the  mixture  into  milk  : 
heat  it  and  drink  it  while  it  is  hot. 

20.  Put  into  milk  the  poivder  of  (Teehata,  heat  the 
milk  and  drink  it. 


21 .  .Put  into  milk  the  roots  of  ffeehata  and  Sa  avari  , 
heat,  the  milk  and  drink  it. 


22.  Put  into  milk  the  seeds  of  Kapikacehn  and  the 
broken  seeds  of  black  gram  heat  the  milk  and  drink  it* 


23.  Put  into  milk  the  seeds  of  Kapikacehu,  Gokslvu- 
raka  and  Ucchata ;  beat  the  milk  ,•  add  to  it  sugar  and 
drink  it. 


14.  Pat  into  milk  black  gram,  the  root  of  the 


pumpkin  and  of  Uockata;  heat  tho  milk,  add  to  it,  ghee 
aud  honey  and  put  sugar  in  it  and  drink  it. 


or, 


i>. 


Drink  the  milk  of  a  sow  having  a  grown  up  pig. 


or  the  milk  of  a  cow  subsisting  on  the  leaves  of  the  black* 
gram  nlafet.  In  all  these  cases  there  will  be  an  increase  of 


semen  virile. 


IT. 

Oil  APT  EE  XXX.  (77). 

Off  Pflin’UME  Mixtures. 

L  To  a  person  whose  hairs  are  white,  flower  wreaths, 
sandal  paste,  perfumed  smoke,  clothes  and  jewels  can  give 


JBIUHAT  8AMH1TA, 


I  ca.  30 


s 


Hliv  is  therefore  necessary  to  blacken  and 
embellish  (bo  hair.  The  same  attention  shall  be  paid  to  it 
as  to  collar  ium  and  jewels. 

2.  Put  into  an  iron  vessel  Vinegar  or  tbo  like  sour 
liquor  j  put  in  it  a  quantity  of  tthe  Kodrava  (ci)  grain  after 
removing  the  busk  ana  iron  dust;  beat  tlio  mixture;  grind 
it  well  on  a  stone  ;  rub  it  over  the  hairs  of  the  head  freed 
from  oil ;  tio  over  the  hairs  the  moist  leaves  of  the  Aragva- 
'  ■' n-  and  the  like  trees  ;  remain  so  for  six  hours. 

3.  Then  removo  the  mixture  from  the  hairs,  and  rub 
over  them  the  paste  of  the  fruit  of  the  Amalaka  (Emfelic 
myrobolanx);  rover  them  with  moist  leaves  as  before  and 
remain  so  tor  another  six  hours  ,*  bathe  as  prescribed  below  ; 

kL 

N.  B.—The  Commentator  advises  the  application  of 
the  mixture  to  shaven  heads. 


4.  t  hen  batlia  in  waters  prepared  for  the  purpose  ; 
rub  ovor  the  hairs  fragrant  oil,  thus  removing  the  disagree¬ 
able  scent  of  the  mixture;  the  pleas uros  of  royalty  may 
thee,  bo  enjoyed  by  a  k i :i g  by  means  of  various  kinds  of 
perfumes. 


5.  Mix  together  equal  quantities  pf  cinnamon, 
Kusbtha,  Re nu  Nalika,  Sprfkka,  Myrrh,  Valaka,  Tugara, 
-Ke.'  ara  and  I  atra  and  griud  them  ou  a  stone  forming  them 
into  a  paste ;  rub  it  ovor  the  head  and  then  bathe;  such  a 
bath  is  suited  to  kings- 

f>.  Mix  together  in  oil  the  powder  of  Manjishtha, 
Vyaghranakha,  Sukti,  cinnamon,  Koslitha  and  myrrh  ; 
heat  tbo  mixture  in  tlio  son.  It  is  known  as  Champaka- 
gandhi  oil. 


a).  For  an  explanation  of  tiio  various  botanical  terms  occurring  in 
tU;g  Chapter  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Glossary  at  t),o  end. 


BIU I! AT  SAMJJITA. 


141 


7.  Grind  together  equal  quanti  ties  of  Pafcra,  Turushka, 
Vain,  and  Tagara  and  you  will  get  a  perfume  provoking 
S&jcual  passion.  Ada  to  this  pci'iutne  Priaognka  and 
expose  the  mixture  to  the  smoke  of  Katukarohiui  and 
Ilingulika.  You  will  get  a  perfume  which  is  known  as 
Vakulagandha-  To  this  add  Kuslitha  and  you  w  ill  get  a 
perfume  known  as  [Ttpalogandlin.  Add  to  this  sandal, 
you  will  get  again  tiie  perfume  known  as  Champakagaudhn. 
Add  to  .this  nutmeg,  cinnamon  and  Kustumbari  ;  you 
will  get  a  perfume  known  as  Atimuktegaudha. 


8.  Mix  together  one  fourth  parts  of  Satapuahpa  and 
Kunduruka,  half  parts  of  Hakim  and  Thurushka,  and  one 
part  of  Sandal  .and  Priangu ;  grind  thorn  well  and  expose 
the  mixture  to  the  smoke  of  Guda  and  Nakha.  You  will 
then  get  an  excellent  perfume. 


0.  Grihd  together  equal  quantifies  of  Jafcamamsi, 
Voluka,  Thurushka,  Nakha  and  Sandal  and  form  a  paste; 
expose  it  to  the  smoko  of  Bdellium,  Valuka,  lac,  Alusta, 
Nakha  and  Sark  are, 

.10.  One  part  of  Haritaki,  2  parts  of  Sankha,  3  parts 
of  Kshudramusta,  4  parts  of  Brava,  5  parts  of  Ambu,  0  parts 
of  Guda,  7  parts  of  Utpnla,  8  parts  of  Sylnka  and  9  parts 
of  Mud, a  give  you  a  porfume.  Numerous  kinds  of  pemures 
raay  be  similarly  prepared  by  mixing  together  different 
parts  of  each  substance. 


Notes. 


The  text  gives  an  instance  of  the  proportion  in  which 
the  ingredients  are  to  be  mixed.  Similarly,  of  the  9  sub¬ 
stances  we  can  take  from  1.  to  9  parts  of  each,  and  no  mixture 
ought  to  contain  the  same  number  of  parts  of  any  two  sub¬ 
stances.  The  question  is  to  find  the  number  of  different 
varieties  of  mixtures.  Suppose  the  nine  substances  to  be 


Bit  IK  AT  SAJI  RITA.' 


[CH- 


re^resented  by  the  nine  letters  from  A  to  L  ih«  propor¬ 
tion  of  t,ho  parts  being  from  1  to  0.  As  each  substance 
may  be  taken  from  1  to  9  parts  and  na  no  two  sub¬ 
stances  shall  be  takon  the  same  number  of  parts  the 
number  of  mixtures  required  is  the  number  of  ways  in  which 
the  figures  from  1  to  9  may  be  written  under  the  letters 
from  A  to  I-  This  is  the  number  of  permutations  of  9 
things  taken  altogether,  which  is  equal  to  1  X  2  X3x4x5Xd 
x7x  8X9“.;  628S0.  Tiro  Stamu>  gives  us  therefore  302880 
different  varieties  of  perfumes. 


II.  Mix  together  4  parts  each  of  Sita,  Syia,  and  Murta 
2  parts  each  of  Sree  and  Sarja,  and  one  part  each  of  Nakha 
ancl  Bdellium,  grind  them  all  on  a  stone  with  honey  ;  add 
to  the  mixture,  Camphor.  You  will  then  get  n  perfume 
known  as  Kopacliuda  (destroyer  of  anger)  fit  only  for  kings. 


12.  Mix  together  Cinnamon,  Usira,  and  Pa  fra  one 
part  each,  and  Sukshmaila  half  a  part  ;  powder  them  well ; 
add  to  the  mixture  equal  parts  oi  Musk  and  Camphor,  You 
will  get  an  excellent  perfume. 


13  &  14.  Of  the  10  substances  Ghana,  Valaka,  Sv le¬ 
va!;  a,  Karpura,  Usira,  Nagapushpa,  Vyaghranakba,  Sprikka 
Aga/u,  Dam&uaka,  Nakha,  Tagara,  Dhannya,  Takkola, 
C’.iora  and  Sandal,  any  four  mixed  in  the  proportion  of 
3,  2,  3,  and  4  parts  will  form  a  perfume-  As  tbe’nunaber 
of  four  substances  out  of  10  is  largo  and  as  each  of 
the  four  substances  may  be  mixed  from  1  to  4  parts  the 
Humber  of  mixtures  will  be  very  large.  The  process  is 
known  as  Gandharnava — ocean  of  perfumes. 


15-  Dhannya  and  Karpura  being  substances  of  strong 
scent,  a  part  of  the  former  and  a  little  less  than  a  part  of  tbo 
latter  shall  bo  added — these  two  substances  shall  never 
be  mixed  in  2,  3,  or  4  parts. 


.  30. 


HEIHA?  SAMHITA. 


143 


16.  Tbo  mixtures  shall  be  exposed  first;  to  the  smoko 
of  Sreevatsa,  secondly*  to  that  of  Sarjara,  thirdly.,  to  that  of 
Guda,  and  lastly  to  that  of  Naklia.  Add  to  the  mixture 
both  Camphor  and  musk- 

17.  The  process  gives  us  174720  («)  different  varieties 
of  perfumes. 

18.  One  part  of  a  substance  can  be  mixed,  with  2,  3 
or  4  parts  of  three  other  substances  in  G  ways.  Similarly 
2,  3  or  4  parts  of  the  same  substancd  can  be  mixed  respec¬ 
tively  with  l,  3,  4, — 1,  2,  4, — 1,  2,  3  parts  of  the  b  other 
substances  each  in  0  ways- 

19.  Thus  beginning  with  a  single  substance  -  \  • 

2-1  varieties  of  perfumes;  beginning  with  #>- 

ofcher  substances  we  shall  get  72 
varieties  in  all.  m 

20-  The  number  of  f 

stances  is  1820.  ..  . 

21.  Every 
varieties;  by ,  . 

number  a)1 

tty- 

(b). 


supp 

enfcf 


9»HV  S 


DEI  HAT  SAMHITA. 


[cn  SO 


f'^'i  v*s4f%*r 

*8L 


In  the  Chapter  on  combinations  in.  Algebra,  we  learn 
that  the  number  of  combinations  of  n  things  taken  r  at  a 
time 


n  (»— 1)  (n — 2)(» — 3) 


.  (n— r+1) 


2  7  3  . 

the  number  of  combinations  10  things  taken  4  at  a  time 

16XI5X14X 13 
_ _ =  1820 

I  X 2x3x4 

Again  take  one  of  these  sets  pf  4  substances.  Call, 
substances  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D ;  each  of  these 
the  mixture  in  1,  2,  3  and  4  parts  ;  but  no  two 
:n  the  same  number  of  parts.  The  ques- 
'  he  number  of  mixtures  that  can  bo 
-fiances.  The  number  required 
the  figures  1,  2,  3  and  4 
■  B,  C,  D-  This  is 
hinga  taken  all 
The  author 
,1  ;  bor  of  such 


■  u  the 


•  ■■ 


BJttKAT  SAMFIITA. 


115 


» 

>> 


2 

4 

4 


2 

4 

1 

1 

1 

o 


4 

2 

4 

l 

0 


Total  6 


A.  B.  C.  I). 


4 

>> 

■» 

r> 

b 

b 


1 

1 

2 

2 

3 

3 


3 

1 

1 


2 


Tota  G 


In  all  24  varieties  for  each  set. 

Now  the  author  says  that  we  shall  get  an o:  her  24 
varieties  beginning  with  the  several  parts  of  B  and  24  begin¬ 
ning  with  the  several  parts  o£  C  and  24  beginning  with  the 
several  parts  of:  D,  thus  95  varieties  in  all.  it  is  clear  that 
Varaha  Mihfra  must  have  ;  dozed  a  little'  when  he  wrote 
stanza  19 ;  for  the  number  of  varieties  in  reality  is  only  14 
and  not  96.  For  the  24  varieties  we  have  given  above  include 
and  are  identical  with  the  72  more  varieties  of  the  author 
Wo  will  begin  for  instance  with  the  sovoral  parts  of  B. 
't  hese  are 


B. 

At,. 

a 

JD. 

B. 

A. 

C. 

I). 

1 

2 

3 

4 

2 

1 

•  J 

4 

n 

2 

4 

3 

» 

1 

4 

3 

3 

o 

4 

)> 

3 

1 

4 

h 

3 

4 

■2 

8 

4 

1 

4 

2 

3 

4 

1 

«> 

O 

i) 

4 

3 

2 

"■} 

4 

ft) 

*> 

1 

Total 

6 

Total 

6 

B. 

A. 

0. 

J), 

B. 

A. 

c. 

D. 

1 

2 

4 

4 

1 

2 

y 

1 

4 

2 

V 

1 

3 

O 

n 

2 

l 

4 

2 

1 

» 

•1 

mJ 

4 

1 

V 

8 

l 

>>  : 

4 

l 

2 

3 

1 

»i> 

o  r 

?> 

4 

0 

<u 

1 

w 

*> 

O 

9 

*5 

i 

Total 

Q 

:  ■ 

Total 

0 

19 


KHIHAT  9AMHITA- 


[oh-  30 


In  ail  84  varieties  beginning  with  the  several  parts  of 
B.  Now  comparing  these  with  the  24  varieties  already 
given,  it  will  be  found  that  the  two  lists  are  identically  the 
same.  So  that  4  substancos  mixed  in  the  proportion  of  1,  ‘2 
8,  4  parts  each,  give  us  only  24  mixtures,  and  not  06. 
Therefore,  the  total  number  of  mixtures  is  24  X  1830--. 
48680  and  not  96X1820  or  174720  as  stated  by  the  author. 
It  is  strange  that  Utpala,  the  commentator,  lias  not  noticed 
the  error. 

As  two  of  the  16  substances  do  not  enter  into  the 
mixtures  in  2,  3  and  4  parts,  wo  will  find  the  actual  num¬ 
ber  of  varieties  under  the  conditions  given - a  point 

which  the  author  has  omitted.  Keeping  aside  the  two  sub¬ 
stances,  the  number  of  sets  of  four  substances  out  of  14  is 
the  number  of  combinations  of  14  things  taken  4  at  a 


time. 


This  is  equal  ts 


14  X  13  X  12  x  11 


1®0I  .  Aff  before 


1X2  X  3  X  4 

each  Sot  will  give  ns  24  mixtures.  The  total  number  on 
mixtures  therefore  is  1001  X  24  =  24024  (I). 

Again  the  number  of  3  substances  out  of  14 
14  x  13  X  12 

~  _ -304.  We  will  now  find  out  the  number  of 


1x2x3 

varieties  of  mixtures,  which  each  set  of  3  substances  will 
give  us,  talcing  them  in  2,  3  and  4  parts,  hot  the  letters 
A,  B,  0,  denote  the  3  substances  and  the  figures  2,  3,  4 
denote  the  parts.  The  number  required  is  the  number  of 
ways  in  which  the  figures  %  3,  4  can  be  written  under  the 
letters  A,B,0,  This  is  the  number  of  permutations  ot  3  things 
taken  nil  together  =  1X2X3=*  6.  Therefore  the  total 
number  of  mixtures  of  3  substances  out  of  14  ~  364  x  0  — 
2 ’  84.  Adding  to  each  of  these  mixtures  one  part  of  Dhauya 
tve  get  2184  mixtures  of  4  substances - -(H)- 


BRtHAT  SAMHITA. 


147 


Adding  to  the  same  a  little  lees  them  a  part  of  ftarpura 
me  get  2184  mixtures  of  4  substance;.; - —(III). 

Now  as  under  the  conditions  of  tho  case  no  two  sub¬ 
stances  shall  enter  into  a  mixture  in  the  same  number  of 
parts,  and  as  the  two  substances  Dlianya  and  Kurpiua  are 
-only  to  be  added  in  one  part  each;  it  is  evident  that  these 
two  do  not  enter  into  a  mixture  together — —otherwise 
we  shall  have  to  #ud  out  the  number  of  sots  of  2  substances 
out  of  14  and  the  number  of  mixtures  of  each  set,  each  sob 
stance  being  taken  from  2  to  4  parts  and  to  each  mixture 
thus  obtained  add  a  mixture  of  on©  part  of  Dhanya  and  a 
little  less  than  a  part  of  Kirpura.  Such  however  does  not 
appear  to  bo  the  object  of  the  author.  He  evidently  wants 
that  each  mixture  shall  contain  10  parts. 

The  total  number  of  mixtures  under  the  conditions 
given  is  24024  +  2134+2] 8 4=28392. 

22.  Beginning  from  unity  form  several  series  of 
numbers  by  adding  together  each  figure  with  tho  next  and 
the  sum  with  the  next  and  so  on  omitting  only  the  last. 
The  last  of  the  series  will  represent  the  number  of  combi 
nations  required. 

Notes : — In  this  stanza,  tire  author  lays  down  a  rule 
for  finding  the  number  of  combinations  of  n  things  taken  r 
together  when  n  and  r  are  known.  For  instance,  required 
tho  number  of  combinations  of  7  things  ti-ken  4  together. 
Write  in  a  lino  the  figures  from  1  to  7  and  call  it  the  first 
series:  thus  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7  . .  (1). 

Form  the  second  series  from  tho  1st  as  follows  : 

1  +  2=  3  ;  3+3  =0;  6+4=10;  10  +  5=15;  15  +  6-21,  So 
that  the  2nd  series  is  1,  3,  6, 10, 15,  21.  ...  ...  (2). 

Form  the  3rd  series  from  the  2nd  as  follows  :  1  +3=4  ; 
4+0=10;  .10  +  10=20;  20  +  15=35.  So  that  the  3rd 

series  is,  1,  4, 10,  20,  35  . .  ...  ...  (3) 


BRIETAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


[OH.  30 


Form  tho  4f.lt  Tories  form  the  3rd  thus  *.  1+4— 5  ; 
6  + 10=  1.5  ;  l5-f20=35 ;  so  that  the  4th  series,  is  l,  5*  15, 35... 
(4)  and  so  on.  The  number  of  combinations,  therefore,  of  7 
thing’s  taken  4  together  is  the  last  number  of  the  4th  series, 


viz.,  $5. 


The  above  may  appear  to  be  a  somewhat  clumsy  pro¬ 
cess.  Bhaakaraebarur  in  his  Lilavati  (Arithmetic)  gives  the 
iudocitical  rule  now  found  in  Western  works  on  Algebra. 
He  says  :  Form  fractions  with  the  figures,  say,  from  7  to  1 
for  numerators,  and  from  1  to  7  for  clono tn iuators  thus  : 


n  (1  f!  4  'i  '2  1 

t»  -jr>  i>  tt  »  m  T‘ 

The  number  of  combinations  of  7  things  taken  2 
together  is  the  product  of  the  first  two  fractiom=21.  The 
number  taken  8  together  is  the  product  of  the  first  three 
fraction8=35.  The  number  faken  4  together  is  the  pro¬ 
duct  of  the  first  4  fractions^ 35  and  so  on-  this  process 
is  also  mentioned  in  the  Aphorisms  of  Piogala  known  as 
0  baud  as  Sutra,  a  very  auoient  work, 

23,  A  gam,  Patfera,  Turushka  and  Syleya  shall  bo 
mixed  in  two,  three, fivo  and  eight  parts  and  Priyangu,Musta, 
Rasa  and  Kesn  shall  be  mixed  in  five,  eight  two,  anrl  three 


parts. 

24.  Sprikka,  Cinnamon,  Tagura  and  Marasi  shall 
bo  mixed  in  four,  one,  seven  and  six  parts  ;  and  Sandal-,  Na- 
kb  a,  Sreeka,  and  Kundurnka  shall  he  mixed  in  seven,  six, 
four,  and  one  parts. 


25.  Each  set  of  four  substances  may  be  mixed  in  all 
possible  ways  in  tho  parts  mentioned — the  number  of  parts 
being  always  eighteen  in  tho  case  of  each  mixture.  The 
mixtures  form  perfumes,  ointment,  and  the  like. 

Note. — As  before,  each  set  of  four  substances  will  give 
34  varieties  of  mixtures. 


IJt.  SO.]  BUXiUT  BAMHtJA.  140 

20.  To  the  mixtures  men  tie  nod  above,  add  equal 
parts  of  Nakha,  Tiigara,  Turnshka,  jSutrneg,  Camphor  and 
musk  and  expose  them  to  the  smoke  of  Guda  and  Nakha. 
Yon  will  get  what  are  known  as  Sarvatobhadra  perfumes- 

27.  If,  to  the  Same  mixtures,  yofi  add  equal  parts  of 
nutmeg,  musk  and  camphor,  and  drench  the  resulting  mix¬ 
tures  in  Sahakara  and  honey  you  will  again  get  what  are 
known  us  Sarvatobhadra  perfumes* 

2ft.  Whenever  the  substances  Sarjarasa  and  Sree- 
vasaka  are  mentioned  with  other  substances  for  giving  per¬ 
fumed  smoke  remove  the  two  and  use  in  tlieir  stead  valaka 
and  cinnamon-  The  resulting  mixture. will  servo  for  bath. 

29  80.  Mix  together  a.iy  three  out  of  the  nine 

substances,  Ludhra,  IJsira,  Nat  a,  Again,  Musta,  Malaya, 
Priyangu,  Dhana  and  Patfcya.  Add  to  the  mixture  one 
part  of  Sandal,  one  part  of  Turushka,  half  a  part  of  Nakha 
and  a  quarter  part  of  SutapusLpa;  expose  the  mixture  to 
the  smoko  of  Katuko,  Hingula  and  Guda ;  wo  thus  get  64 
different  varieties  of  mixtures* 

Notes;  The  number  of  combinations  of  nine  sub¬ 
stances  taken  3  at  a  time  is  equal  to  «■  x£=84 

3] .  Allow  the  tooth-brush  (a)  to  soak  iu  tho  uriuo  of 
the  cow  mixed  with  the  powder  iof  Haritalii  for  7  days. 
Then  pub  it  in  fragrant  water  prepared  «3  described  below. 

32.  Fragraut  water  shall  bo  prepared  with  cardamom, 
cinnamon,  pattra,  Anjana,  honey,  Maricha,  Nagapushpa 
and  Jvushtfca  and  allow  tho  tooth-bru-ih  to  remain  in  tlio 
water  till  it  becomes  fragrant, 

(a).  Thi a  is  a  piece  of  stick  or  small  twig  of  particular  trees  (vido 
Chap.  83;  used  as  tooth-brush. 


Bill  HAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


6 

33.  Mix  together  the  powder  of  4  parts  of  nutmeg, 
2  parts  of  patra,  and  olid  part  of  cardamom  and  camphor ; 
umear  it  over  the  tooth-brush  and  d r v  it  in  the  sun. 

34.  Tooth-brush  prepared  as  stated  above  shall  be 
used  by  ibe  Brahmins,  the  Kshatryas,  and  the  Vysias 
only.  By  its  use  tiie  appearance  of  a  person  will  become 
bright,  his  countenance  will  become  agreeable*  his  mouth 
pure  and  of  good  smell,  and  his  voice  sweet. 

35.  The  chewing  of  Tamboola  (a)  excites  sexual 
passion,  brightens  personal  appearance,  promotes  pros¬ 
perity,  causes  tlio  mouth  to  smell  sweet,  increases  strength, 
removes  phlegmatic  affections  and  prod  aces  many  other 
benefits. 

36.  A  duo  admixture  of  linio  reddens  tho  lips-  If 
the  nut  exceed  its  measure  it  will  bring  down  the  color  j 
if  tho  limo  exceed  its  measure,  the  mouth  will  smell 
ill  and  if  the  leaves  exceed  their  measure  the  mouth  will 
bo  of  good  smell. 

37.  If  the  leaves  exceed  their  measure  at  night  or 
the  nut  exceed  its  measure  by  day  the  effect  will  be  good 
if  the  case  bo  otherwise,  the  Tamboola  will  nob  be  found 
sweet.  If  the  Tamboola  contain  as  its  ingredients  Takola, 
Areconut,  Lavaliphala  and  Parijata,  it  will  exhiliratd  tho 
spirit  and  excite  sexual  passion. 


Glossary  of  Medical  and  Botanical  terms  occurring  in 
Chapters  76  &  77. 

A. 

Agnru,  Amyris  Agallooha. 

Ambit,  the  plant  Andropogoa  Schoenanthus.  p@Geun- 
Anjann,  Antimony. 


(a).  This  consists  of  Arocamit  and  betel  mixed  with  lime. 


BRIHAT  BA  MBIT  A*  lhl 

Arag-vadha,  tliQ  tree  Cathartocarpus  Fistula. 
Aswagandha,  tlio  plant  Physalis  Floxuosa. 

C. 

Chora,  a  kind  of  perfume.  The  plant  Chrysopogon 
Aciculatus. 

1). 

Hamanaka,  Artemisia  Indica. 

Dhana,  the  plant  Alhagi  Mnurorura  ?  ©u0c/i^a*/r#f. 
Dhanyaka,  Coriander  seeds.  Oa^.^mwsSeflanff 
Brava,  Myrrh. 

G 

Ghana,  the  bulbous  root  of  the  plant  Syperua  Ilex- 
astyehus  Communis.  ^^n-mjr&QLpisi^ 

Gokshurakn,  the  plant  Asteracautha  Longifolia.  <^0- 
Guda,  a  kind  of  bdellium.  0E'8«?<ud>. 

II 

Haritaki,  the  froit  of  the  Teiminalia  Chebuia. 
JHinguka,  the  prickly  night  Shade ;  Solon  am 

Jacgaiui- 

I 

Ikshuraba,  Asteracantba  Longifolia.  i^reif). 

J 

datamamsi,  the  plant  Kardostachis  Jatamamsi. 

K 

Kapikacchu,  the  plant  Mucuna  Pruritus.  ^Ss»«w9. 
Katuka,  a  fragrant  grass,  Trichosanthes  Dioeca.  *©*- 

Kesa,  the  plant  Andrapog on  Schoenanthus 
Kesara,  Mimusops  Elcngi.  a.©£puurun 


bkihat  sAtfiim. 


[no.  50. 

Kodrava,  a  species  of  gram  eaten  by  the  poor.  Pus- 
pal  urn  Scrobiculatura. 

Kunduruka,  the  resin  of  the  plant  Boswell  ia  Thurifera. 

Kushtha,  a  medicinal  plant  Coslua  ISpeciosua  or  Arabi-* 
cus. 

Kustumburi,  Coriander  seeds.  Qan-^^we^Mmir. 

li 

Lavaliphala,  the  fruit  of  the  Averrhoa  A  cida. 

Lodhra,  the  tree)  Symplocoa  Racetnosaj  the  bark  of 
which  is  used  in  dyeing. 

M 

Makshika-dhatu,  a  kind*of  pyrites;  — a  kind  of  honey 
like  mineral  substance. 


Malaya,  Sandal-wood. 

’Manjishthu,  Bengal  madder. 

Mrjg-i,  Music.  :0sbj&rtf. 

Mudra,  Cypevus  Rotund  us, 

Muste,  a  species  of  grass.  Cv perns  Rotundas. 

N 

Kagepushpa,  Mesua  Roxburgh i  '  *.? 

Nakha,  a  vegetable  perfume. 

Naiika,  a  fragrant  substance. 

Naif;  the  seed  of  the  Cassia  Tom. 

P 

Pari ja tn ,  n ul meg  ? 

Pathya,  titrou.  Tertninalia  Chebula. 

I'afnij  the  leaf  of  the  Cassia. 

Priyangu,  a  medicinal  plant  and  perfume. 


R 

Ren%  a  drug  or  medicinal  substance  fragrant  but 
bitter  and  slightly  pungent  i  taste  and  of  a  greyish 
color. 


B El  HAT  SAMHITA. 


153 


Sahaknra,  a  sort*  of  fragrant  Mango  tree. 

Sailaka,  bitumen . 

fcarja,  the  resinous  exudation  of  the  Sal  tree. 

Sarkara,  grit. 

Satajpnshpa,  a  sort  of  dill  or  fennel.  Anethum  Sowa 

Satavari,  Asparagus  Kaeeinosns. 

Sifca,  grit. 

Sprikka,  the  plant  TrigonMla  Corniculta.  etr*uy. 

Sroe,  Turpentine. 

Sukslmiaila,  small  cardamoms. 

Sukti,  a  sort  of  perfume  iu  appearance  like  the  dried 
Shell  fish. 

T 

Tagara,  the  seed  of  Cassia  Tora 
Takkola,  the  tree  Pimenta  Acris 
Triphala,  the  three  myrobalana,  the  fruits  of  Termi 
nalia  Chobuln,  Terminalia  Bellorioa,  Phyllanthtn 
Emblica.  ttai&mu,  tJDir&airii. 

Turushka,  a  species  of  Khnduruka  Oiibanum,  Indian 
incense;  the  resin  of  Boswellia  S errata.  u;'HSfrju> 

jr,Tsm?, 

V 

IJcchftta,  the  root  of  Cy  perns  Juneifol. 

Usira,  the  fragrant  root  of  the  plant  Audropogdn  Mn- 
ricutus.  Giau.ltp.VftjtT. 

Utpala,  ohe  plant  Costus  Speeiosns. 

V 

Vala,  a  fragrant  grass,  Andropogon  Shoemanthus. 

<3W, 

Valuka,  a  species  of  Cucumber. 

Vidanga,  Erycibo  Pamculata.  utiis th. 

"  '■  ■  1  '  .  20  '  ' 


Mill  HAT  *oAMI.irTA, 


■ 


V'j'ufrlitanaklm,  ft  kind  ol:  medicinal  lieib  with  a  fra¬ 


grant  root.  p  $jre$kj  to. 


V. 

CHAPTER  XXXI.  (78;. 


On  Sexual  Union. 


* 

1.  King  Vidurattha  was  killed  by  his  queen  who  con-  • 


cealed  ft  weapon  in  her  plaited  hair,*  and  the  king  of  ’Be-, 
narcs  wns  killed  by  his  queen,  who  disliked  him,  with  poison 
which  she  carried  in  her  anklets. 

2.  Thus  wives  who  do  not  love  their  husbands  lia/e 
killed  them.  Of  what  use  is  it  to  quote  more  instances.  Hus¬ 
bands  shall  therefore  ascertain  in  various  ways  whether 
they  have  secured  the  affeotion  of  their  wives. 

8.  A.  loving  wife  shows  her  love  in  various  ways.  She 
will,  in  the  presence  of  her  lord;  shew,  as  if  by  accident, 
Ivor  navel,  nrms,  and  ornaments  and  will  adjust  her 
garments  ;  will  allow  the  hairs  of  her  head  to  fall  loose  as* 
if  by  accident,  will  raise  her  eyebrows,  will  tremble,  and 
will  cast  a  side-look  at  her  husband. 

4.  She  will  spit  aloud  ;  laugh  openly;  get  first  into  the 
bod  ;  crack  her  joints  ;  yawn  ;  bog  for  the  gift  of  trifles ;  em¬ 
brace  a  child  and  kiss  it;  will  fora  time  look  at  her  friend  > 
look  at  her  husband  when  bis  look  is  turned  from  her  * 
scratch  her  ears  :  and  will  speak  in  his  praise  iu  his  absence 

5.  A  loving  wife  will,  besides,  speak  affectionately  to 
her  husband,  assist  him  with  her  money,  wi)l  give  up  her 
anger  at  the  sight  of  her  lord  and  will  be  filled  with  pleasur¬ 
able  sensations  ;  will  meet  any  calumnious  attacks  on  him 
by  recounting  his  virtues. 

f>.  £>ho  will  show  duo  respect  to  fcho  friends  of  her 
lord  and  hate  his  enemies ;  silo  will  foel  grateful  to  him 
f.  or  bis  helps ;  will  feel  distressed  during  his  absence. 


mtiHAT  -SA'AiUtTA 


i  <»  y 


*?.  An  unloving  wi To  will  CQxitr&ct  her  eye-brows  > 
turn  her  look  away  from  her  lord  j  will  bo  wanting  in 
gratitude ;  will  not  move  from  her  place  at  the  eight  of 
hor  husband;  will  never  feel  cheerful  j  her  lips  will  be 
dull  and  motionless  $  she  will  be- friend  the  enemies  oflur 
loud  and  will  be  harsh  in  her  speech. 


8.  She  will  shake  with  fear  at  the  sight  or  touch  of 
her  lord;' will  feel  haughty;  will  not  attempt  to  pacify  her 
lord  when  he  leaves  her  company  in  auger ;  she  will  wipe 
off  her  face  after  sexual  enjoyment ;  will  go  to  bed  before 


her  lord  and  rise  after  him. 


9  &  tO-  Begging  women,  female  devotees,  maid  ear- 
van  ts,  the  nurse,  girl*,  tho  laundress,  the  flower-womtm.  the 
harlot,  a  ft  iend,  the  barbar  woman,  these  generally  serve  an 
messengers  or  go-betweens  for  women  and  bring  disgrace 
and  ruin  on  respectable  families  ;  ife  is  therefore  necessary 
to  protect  family  women  from  the  intrigues  of  these  per¬ 
sons  and  to  maintain  the  honor,  fame,  and  respectability  of 
the  family. 

11.  To  go  out  at  night,  to  keep  awake  on  the  pre 
fence  of  ft  religious  observance,  to  excuse  herself  on  the 
false  plea  of  illness,  to  be  found  for  ever  in  tho  bouses  of 
other  persons,  to  attend  play 3  and  the  like,  to  consul:  as¬ 
trologers;,  to  frequent  mourning  houses  or  festivals  arc  acts 
from  which  Women  should  bo  kept  bock,. 


12.  A  modest  wife  is  one  who  out  of  shame  does  not 
first  exhibit  an  inclination  to  sexual  embrace;  who 
throughout  is  nevertheless  subject  to  sexual  passion. 

13.  The  virtues  of  a  woman  are  young  age,  beauty, 
decoration  with  ornaments,  being  agreeable  to  her  lot  <i. 


being  learned  in  matters  which  will  make  married  lit® 
happy  and  being  of  a  playful  nature.  A.  lady  possessing 
these  virtues  is  known  as  a  female  gem.  A  v  orap  » 


BBIHAT,  SAlflHlTA 


[CH- 


possessing  these  virtues  ia  loathed  by  a  man  of  taste  as 
r,  disease. 

Notes. — Vyasft  says  :  A  woman  who  is  elm  to  and 
innocent,  who  eats  pure  meals,  who  is  of  sweet  speech  and 
who  is  fondly  attached  to*  her  husband  is  known  as  a  Luksh- 
mi  (goddess  of  wealth). 


Again,  a  woman  who  lias  ugly  oyes,  who  is  dirty, 
quarrelsome,  talkative,  is  known  as  a  Rakshasi  (Fury). 

H.  A  woman  shall  not  indulge  in  low  language  ;  nor 
shall  she  wear  bad  colored  clothes;  nor  bo  ot  a  dirty  body. 


lo.  A  good  wife  is  one  who  breathes  unlike  men  ;  who 
extends  hor  arms  to  her  lord  to  serve  as  a  pillow  for  his 
haaa  ;  the  hair  of  whoso  head  is  of  good  smell,  who  is  fondly 
attached  to  her  husband  ;  who  sleeps  after  him  and  rises 
before  him. 


16.  A  woman  of  a  wicked  nature  and  ono  of  weak 
health  shall  be  rejected.  A  woman  whoso  Sonita  (blood) 
is  black,  green,  yellow,  or  of  copper  color  shall  also  bo  re- 


17.  A  person  shall  not  join  in  sexual  union  a  woman 
who  sleeps  too  much,  whose  blood  discharges  are  excessive, 
who  is  of  an  over  bilious,  phlegmatic  or  windy  tempera¬ 
ment,  who  perspires  often,  who  is  of  defective  or  extra  or¬ 
gans  and  whoso  hair  is  short  or  grey; 

18.  Whose  calves  are  exceedingly  fleshy,  whose  belly  is 
large,  who  is  noisy  and  who  is  possessed  of  other  vices  des¬ 
cribed  in  the  Chapter  on  the  features  of  women. 

19.  Tl  at  blood  is  faultless  which  resembles  the  blood 
of  the  hare  or  the  juice  of  rcd-cotton  and  which  when  well 
rubbed  disappears. 

«0.  If  the  blood  How  out  without  pair  and  noise,  and 
stoj)s  after  three  days,  there  will  be  conception  at  the  next 
sexual  nni^n. 


BBIKA  SAMHITA 

21.  For  tho  three  clays  from  the  day  of 
of  the  menses  a  woman  shall  not  bathe,  wear 
sandal,  and  on.  the  fourth  day  she  shall  bathe  as 
iu  the  Smritis- 

22.  After  tills,  the  vegetable  ingredients 
for  Pushy  a  Span  a  shall  be  brought  and  put  in 
the  several  mantras  therein  mentioned  shall  be 


3  5 


appearance 
flowers,  or 
prescribed 

prescribed 
water  and 
pronounced 


over  the  vessel  and  the  woman  shall  bathe  in  the  water. 

23.  On  the  even  nights  (from  the  day  of  appearance 
of  the  menses)  a  woniao  conceives  a  male  child  and  on  the 
odd  nights,  a  female  child.  If  the  conception  occur  early 
the  issue  will  be  a  beautiful  child  of  long  and  happy  life- 


24,  If  the  foetus  he  on  the  right  side  the  iss-ue  will  bo 
a  male  child  if  on  the  left  side,  it  will  bo  a  female  child. ; 
if  on  both  sides  there  will  bo  a  birth  of  twins  and  if  iu 

the  middle  of  the  abdomen  the  issue  will  be  a  herma¬ 
phrodite- 


2*.  A  person  shall  join  a  woman  in  sexual  love  when 
the  henefic  planets  occupy  the  angles  or  tho  triangular 
signs ;  when  they  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  the  sign  occu¬ 
pied  by  the  Moon  ;  when  tuale 6c  planets  occupy  the  third, 
sixth  aod  eleventh  houses ;  and  in  male  planetary  yogas  (a). 

2b.  At  the  time  of  union  a  person  shad  not  wound 
a  woman  with  his  nails  and  teeth  ;  there  shall  bo  no  union 
beyond  the  first  sixteen  days  from  the  day  of  appearance 
of  the  menses  or  in  any  of  the  first  three  days- 

Notes. — Add  to  these  restrictions  tho  number  of  mal¬ 
efic  planetary  yogas  described  in  Chapter  I V"  of  Brihafc 
Jatakn. 

Again,  according  to  the  Sastras  a  person  shall  cease  to 
cohabit  with  a  woman  after  the  birth  of  a  son — tire  object 
of  marriage  being  thereby  secured. 


(a.)  Vide  Stwiaw  11  ami  12  of  Chapter  IV  of  the  BrUmt  J  a  taka. 


58  DEI  EAT  a  Aid  Hi  T4  1  C’H.  ill 

Again,  the  Smrrbs  rofer  to  a  number  of.’  days  in  winch 
cohabitation  is  prohibited,  such  as  the  new- moon  and  Tali- 
moon  days,  the  eleventh  lunar  day  and  the  like.  The  Rishis 
of  old  appear  to  have  strictly  followed  ali  these  rules.  If 
the  whole  world  could  be  equally  firm' minded,  there  would 
probably  be  no  occasion  for  so  many  curious,  elaborate  and 
sometimes  even  frightful  solutions  of  the  problem  to  check 
the  growth  of  population*  You  allow  the  evil  to  grow  aud 
then  seek  a  remedy ;  but  the  Sastrasaim  at  nipping  the  evil 
in  the  bud.  Of  course  when  the  demand  exceeds  supply 
and  a  disturbance  of  the  social  equilibrium  occurs,  nature 
restores  it  by  applying  her  own  remedy — by  carrying  away, 
every  now  and  then,  thousands  by  wars,  by  the  plague  and 
the  like  epidemics. 

On  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses:  The  four 
as teris ms  from  Kvittika  are  known  as  inner  aster- 
isms  and  the  four  from  Punarvasu  are  known  as  the 
oil  ter  asterismS,  Again  the  four  from  Maglia  are  known  as 
inner  aateris  ns,  and  the  four  from  Chitra  are  known  as  outer 
asterisins,  and  so  on,  till  we  coino  to  the  end. of  the  lunar 
Zodiac.  For  a  list  of  the  §18  nsterisuns  vide  page  8?,  Part  I. 
If  the  hist  appearance  of  the  menses  occur  when  the  Moon 
passes  through  one  of  the  inner  asterisras,  there  will  be 
prosperity,  increase  of  family  aud  the  like.  If  the  first 
appearance  of  the  menses  occur  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  one  of'  the]  outer  aflterisms,  thore  will  be  misery^ 
w  idowhood,  death  of  son?,  sorrow  and  the  like. 

Again,  divide  the  27  asteriams  (omitting  Abhijit)  into 
seven  groups  of  8$  A?,  5,  7  aud  d  asteriams  beginning  from 
LT.  Ashadha,  If  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses  occur  in 
any  of  these,  the  effects  will  respectively  bo  gain  of  wealth, 
gain  of  sons,  servitude,  sweet  speech,  ruin,  attachment  to 
husband  and  widowhood. 


BR1ITAT  SAWHITA 


H9 


Again,  if  the  first  appearance  occur  when  the  rising 
sign  is  Aries,  the  woman  will  becomo  unchaste;  when  it  is 
Taurus,  she  wii i  annoy  others  ;  if  Gemini,  sho  will  become 
rich  and  happy  ;  if  Cancer,  she  will  cohabit  with  an  out- 
caste  ;  if  Leo,  she  will  get  a  son  j  if  Virgo,  she  will  become 
rich  ;  if  Libra,  sho  will  become  deformed  ;  if  Scorpio,  she 
will  become  unchaste.  Ji  the  first  half  of  Sagittari,  she  will 
become  wicked ;  if  the  second  half,  she  will  be  chaste  ;  if 
Capricorn,  she  will  become  shameless ;  if  Acquartu-%  she  wdj 
become  pool’  and  barren ;  and  if  Pisces,  sho  will  become 
beautiful. 

Also,  if  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses  occur  on  a 
Sunda)',  the  woman  will  be  afflicted  with  diseases;  if  on 
a  Monday,  she  will  become  chaste;  if  Tuesday,  she  will 
suffer  grief  ;  if  Wednesday,  she  will  get  sous;  if  Thursday s 
she  will  live  in  plenty  ;  if  Friday,  sho  will  prosper  well ; 
and  if  on  a  Saturday*  she  will,  meet  with  early  death. 

Also,  if  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses  occur  in  tho 
forenoon,  the  woman  will  be  happy ;  if  in  the  afternoon, 
she  will  sutler  miseries  ;  if  at  noon,  she  will  be  neither 
happy  nor  miserable. 


Again,  if  the  first  appearance  of  the  menses  occur 
within  12  Gh&tikas  at  night,  the  woman  will  bo  happy.  To 
prevent  tho  death  of  the  child  in  the  womb  Souuaka  has 
prescribed  the  following  ceremony :  Perform  Ajya  llorna 
(pouring  gheo  into  the  fire)  reciting  the  mantra  commen¬ 
cing. 

“  Brali manag  samvidanaV-’  rub  over  the  woman  a 
portion  of  the  ghee  remaining  in  the  vessel  and  enuse  her 
to  bath3  and  then  drink  the  remaining  ghee- 

To  prevent  the  death  of  children  soon  after  birth,  Scu- 
naka  lias  prescribed  an  elaborate  ceremony.  The  reader  is 
referred  to  Souaaka’s  Sanfci  Kalpa. 


BUIITAT  SAMHTtA 


cir. 


CHAPTER  XXXII  (79). 

On  Cots  and  Beats- 

].  As  Cots  ami  Scats  are  useful  to  all  people  at  all 
times  and  especially  so  to  Kings,  I  begin  to  treat  of  them 
here. 

2.  The  wood  of  the  following  trees  is  suited  for  the 
construction  of  Cots  and  Seats :  Asana  (ct)  Byandana,  (6) 
Chandana,  Haridra,  Suradaru  (c)  Tinduki,  Sal  a  (palm), 
Kasnmri  (d)  Anjana,  Padmaka,  Saka,  and  Skusapa. 

3.  The  trees  described  below  shall  be  rejected  ‘  tree 
that  have  fallen  owing  to  an  attack  of  lightning,  flood,  winds 
or  elephant,  those  '•obtaining  bee-hives  or  in  which  birds 
dwell,  those  that  grow  in  places  of  worship,  in  cremation 
grounds  or  in  roads,  those  whose  barks  have  dried  up  or 
which  i»r©  covered  with  twining  creepers. 

4.  Trees  which  are  covered  with  thorns  or  which  grow 
at  the  junction  of  great  rivers  or  in  temples  or  which  when 
cut  fall  on  the  western  or  southern  side  shall  also  be  rejec' 
ted. 

5.  If  Cots  and  Seats  be  made  of  such  trees,  the  family 
will  suffer  miseries  and  there  will  bo  diseases,  fear,  loss 
quarrels,  and  the  like. 

6-  If  there  be  the  wood  of  any  trees  already  cut  down 
available  for  the  purpose  it  shall  first  be  examined  ;  it  a 
child  gets  on  it, a  person  will  get  cows  and  children  by  its 
use 

7.  If  white  flowers,  a  rutting  elephant,  curdled  milk, 
colored  rice,  water  pots,  gems  and  the  like  benefic  objects 
bo  observed  at  the  time,  there  will  be  prosperity. 


(a) .  Asana,  tho  tree  Terminal  ia  Tomentwi. 

(b) .  Syamlana  :  the  tree  Dolbe rgia  Ottgeiuenaifl.* 

( r ).  Snradaru  :  the  Devadaru  ;  pino  ;  Finns  Docdera. 

(d),  Kasmari :  the  tree*  Qmolina  Arborea*  Tho  other  tornu?  hare 
already  been  explained. 


BRTHAT  HAIIjIITA 


9.  The  length  of  8  grains  of  barley  rice  placed  close 
and  parallel  to  one  another,  is  known  as  the  Carpenter’s  inch  ; 
the  length  of  the  king’s  cot  shall  be  100  such  inches 

9.  The  Cots  of  the  first  Prince,  the  Minister,  the 
Commander  in  Chief  and  the  Priest  shall  respectively  bo  90, 
84,78 and  72  inches  long. 

10.  The  breadth  of  the  Cot  shall  be  T\ths  of  tho  length, 
according  to  Viswakarma;  and  the  height  of  the  legs  shall 
be  a  third  of  the  length. 

11.  If  the  Cots  be  wholly  made  of  the  wood  of  Sree- 
parni,  or  Tinduka  there  will  be  acquisition  of  wealth,  and 
if  made  of  Aaana,  there  will  bo  health. 

12.  Tf  the  Cot  be  wholly  made  of  the  wood  of  Sirnsnpa> 
there  will  be  prosperity  in  various  ways  ;  if  of  Sandal,  a 
person  will  be  freed  from  troubles  from  bis  enemies,  aud  will, 
live  long,  leading  a  life  of  virtuo  and  renown. 

13.  If  the  Cot  be  wholly  made  of  tho  wood  of  Pad- 
maka,  there  will  be  long  life,  prosperity,  wealth  and  skill 
in  the  use  of  weapons  ;  if  of  the  wood  of  Saka  or  Sala  there 
will  be  happiness. 

14.  A  king  who  uses  a  Cot  made  wholly  of  Sandal 
wood  and  covered  with  gold  set  with  various  gems  will  he 
honored  even  by  Devas. 

15.  If  the  wood  of  tho  Tinduki,  Simsapa,  Sroeparni, 
Devadaru  or  Asana  be  coupled  with  other  wood  it  will  not 
conduce  to  prosperity. 

.16.  The  wood  of  Saka  and  Sala  may  be  used  either 
separately  or  jointly.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the 
wood  of  Haridra  and  Xvaclaraba. 

17.  A  Cot  made  wholly  of  the  wood  of  Syandana  will 
not  conduce  to  prosperity  ;  one  made  wholly  of  the  wood 
of  Amba  will  bring  ou  death  and.  one  made  of  the  wood 


21 


n  RIB  AT  PAM  HIT  A 


of  Asana  coupled  with  other  wood  will  bring  on  nume¬ 
rous  miseries. 

38-  If  the  legs  be  made  of  the  wood  of  feytotdaria, 
Amba  or  Clumdana,  they  will  conduce  to  prosperity.  Cota 
and  seats  mode  wholly  of  the  wood  of  fruit  trees  will  also 
conduce  to  prosperity. 

10.  Com  made  of  wood  and  set  with  ivory  are  excel¬ 
lent  ;  various  ornamental  works  shall  bo  done  *u  ivory. 

20.  In  cutting*  ivory  a  length  equal  to  double  the 
circumference  at  the  root  of  the  tusks  shall  bo  left  /  it  tit© 
elephant  be  one  dwelling  on  water  banks  a  larger  portion 
shall  bo  left  and  if  it  be  one  dwelling  in  the  mountains  a 

smaller  portion  may  be  left. 

21.  If,  in  the  cut,  there  be  lines  of  the  shape  of  the 
cross  or  a  dish,  un  umbrella,  a  flag-staff,  or  a  I  hamara 
there  will  respectively  be  health,  success,  wealth,  prospei ity 


ami  comfort. 

22.  If  the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a  weapon  there 
will  bo  success  ;  if  quadrangular  in  shape  the  king  will  re¬ 
cover  a  lost  country.  And  if  of  the  shape  of  a  clod,  ho  will 
recover  a  country  obtained  and  lost. 

23.  If  the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a  woman  there 
will  be  loss  of  wealth  ;  if  of  the  shape  of  a  golden  pitcher, 
the  king  will  got  sons  ,*  if  of  tho  shape  of  a  pot ,  he  will  get 
hidden  treasure,  and  if  of  the  shape  of  a  club  his  intended 
journey  will  be  stopped- 

24.  If  the  lines  be  of  the  shape  of  a  bloodsucker,  a 
monkey,  or  a  snake  there  will  be  dearth  ami  disease,  nod  the 
king  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  nud  it  the  lines 
be  of  the  shape  of  a  vulture,  an  owl,  a  crow,  a  hawk,  the 
king  s  subjects  will  suffer  from  plague. 

25.  If  the  Hues  bo  of  the  shape  of  a  rope  or  a  head  - 
less  trunk  tho  king  will  dio  or  his  subjects  will  suffer  mise- 


BlUr?  AT  8AMOITA 


16$ 


vies  respectively  ;  if  blood  comes  oat,  ov  if  tho  cut  be  black 
or  red-black  or  of  disagreeable  appearance  or  of  bad  (Smell 
there  will  be  misery. 

26  If  the  out  be  white,  even,  glossy  and  of  good 
smell  there  will  be  prosperity-  1  be  effects  ascribed  to  the 
cutting  of  ivory  apply  also  to  the  cutting  of  wood  tor  cots 
and  the  like. 

27.  In  joining  the  beams  of  a  bed-stead  the  ends  shall 
be  made  to  come  round  from  left  to  right; (a)  if  the  re¬ 
verse  be  the  case  or  if  the  ends  do  not  point  to  all  the  four 
quarters  there  will  be  an  attack  of  evil  spirits. 


28.  If  a  single  leg  should  have  its  end  pointing  to  the 
ground,  tho  person  will  suffer  injuries  to  his  leg  ;  if  two 
legs  should  be  SO,  lie  will  suffer  from  indigestion  ;  and  if 
three  or  four,  he  will  suffer  from  grief:  or  be  killed  or  im¬ 
prisoned. 

29-  If  the  knot  at  the  top  of  the  log  bo  found  with  a 
hole  or  of  a  had  color  there  will  bo  suffering  from  disease, 
an  d  if  thero  be  a  knot  at  the  centre  ot  the  leg  there  will  be 
suffering  from  belly-ache. 

30.  If  there  be  a  knot  just  below  the  centre  the 
master  will  suffer  injuries  to  his  shanks;  if  tho  knot  boa 
little  lower  down  he  will  suffer  loss  of  wealth. 

1,  If  there  bo  a  knot  at  the  foot  of  the  leg  hoofed 
animals  will  suffer ;  if  there  be  throe  knots  in  the  frames 
there  will  be  much  suffering. 

82-  The  holes  in  tho  four  frames  of  a  bestead  are 
of  G  sorts,  known  as  Nishknta,  Kolaksha,  Sukaranayano, 
Vatsanabha,  ICalaka,  and  Dbundhuka. 

33.  A  hole  which  is  large  within  and  with  a.  small 
mouth  thus  resembling  a  pet  is  known  as  iSishkutaj  a 

(,,)  Tbo  end  of  tho  northern  frame  shall  poiut  to  the  CiWfc,  that  of 
the  eastern  one  shall  poiut  to  the  south  and  eo  on. 


BRU57T  SAM  II 1 7' A 


ch.  33 


black  hole  of  the  size  of  a  grain  of  black  gram  is  kuowu 
as  kolnksha. 

34.  An  irregular  hole  which  is  of  one  of  the  main  co¬ 
lons  and  whose  length  is  that  of  a  huger  joint  and  a  half 
is  known  as  Sukaranayana  and  one  which  turns  from  right 
to  left,  which  is  split  and  of  the  length  of  a  finger  joint,  is 
known  as  Vatsanabha- 

35.  A  black  hoie  is  known  as  kal&ka  and  one  which 
is  split  is  known  as  Dhundhuka.  Generally  if  the  holes  be 
of  the  color  of  the  wood.,  they  do  not  point  to  evil. 

36.  A  Niahkuia  hole  will  bring  loss  of  wealth,  a  Kola- 
ksha  hole  will  bring  the  ruin  of  the  family ;  a  Ankara  holo 
will  bring  fear  and  injury  from  weapons,  and  a  Vatsanabha 
hole  will  bring  suffering  from  disease. 

37.  Jvalaka  and  Dhundhunka  holes  as  well  as  a  hole 
caused  by  worms  will  nob  conduce  to  prosperity  ,*  if  the 
holes  be  in  knotty  parts,  the  wood  is  fit  for  no  purpose. 

38.  If  the  Cot,  Seat,  and  the  like  be  made  of  one  wood 
of  fruit  trees,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth;  if  of  two  sorts 
of  wood  there  will  be  great  gain  of  wealth  ,  if  of  throe,  sons 
will  increase,  and  if  of  four,  the  person  will  become  wealthy 
and  famous. 

39.  II  the  Cot  be  made  of  five  different  sorts  of  wood 
of  fruit  trees  the  person  sleeping  on  it  will  meet  with  death  j 
and  if  it  be  made  of  six,  seven  or  eight  different  sorts  of 
wood,  his  family  will  suffer  ruin, 

CHAPTER  XXXIIL  (SO). 

Osr  Diamonds, 

I.  A  good  gem  brings  prosperity  to  the  king  and  a 
bad  one  brings  misery.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  ex-, 
amine  the  properties  of  gems  with  the  help  of  persona  learn¬ 
ed  in  the  science;  for  a  person’s  fortune  depends  upon  the 
gems  he  possesses. 


BRIflAT  SAMflltA 


105 


33*3 


2-  Elephants,  horses  and  women  possessed  of  excel¬ 
lent  virtues  are  also  known  as  gems ;  but  (liamouds  and  the* 
liko  gems  to  be  treated  of  in  this  Chapter  are  stones  and 
the  like  possessed  of  many  excellent  qualities. 

3.  According  to  some,  gems  are  the  bones  of  Bair  sura 
and  according  to  others  they  are  the  bones  of  the  sage  Da- 
dhichi.  In  the  opinion  of  some,  gems  are  various  sorts  of 
stones  which  naturally  exist  in  the  earth. 

4.  Twenty-two  Idifleronb  sorts  of  gems  are  mentioned  : 
These  are  the  diamonds,  sapphire,  emerald,  kurketana,  ruby, 
rudhira,  vydurya,  pulaka,  vimalaka,  r.ijamani,  crystal  or 
quartz,  moon-stone. 

5-  Songandliika,  gotnodaka,  conch-shell,  mahanila,  to¬ 
paz,  In  r!’-  .  '  asa,  opal,  pearls  and  corals. 

6.  Diamonds  roam,  on  the  banks  of  tho^  river  Vena  are 
white  ;  those  found  in  the  proviuco  of  Oudh  are  somewhat 
yellow  ;  diamonds  found  in  Surat  are  somewhat  of  the  color 
of  copper  cud  those  of  Supa  are  black. 


7.  The  Himalayan  diamonds  are  some  what  of  the  color 
of  copper  and  those  found  in  the  Matnnga  mountains  are 
somewhat  yellow,  ^Gan jam  diamonds  are  also  yellow.  Ben¬ 
gal  and  Behav  diamonds  are  green. 

8.  A  diamond  which  is  white  and  has  six  sides  is 
sacred  to  Indra;  one  that  is  black  and  of  the  shape  of  the 
mouth  of  the  serpent  is  sacred  to  Yama ;  one  that  is  green 
and  of  various  shapes  is  sacred  to  Vishnu. 

1).  A  diamond  •wMch.is  of  the  shape  of  a  female’s  geni¬ 
tal  organ  and  of  the  color  of  the  flower  of  karoiksra  (L’teros" 
permum  Acerifolium)  is  sacred  to  Varan  a ;  one  that  is  of 
the  shape  of  the  fruit  of  Sringa  taka  (Trapa  Bispinosa)  and  of 
tho  color  of  the  eyes  of  the  tiger  is  sacred  to  Agni. 

10  A  diamond  wbioh  is  of  the  shape  of  a  grain  o* 
barley  and  of  the  color  of  the  flower  of  the  Ast  ka  is  sacred 


HRIH.yr  SAMHITA 


to  Vayu  (a)  Diamonds  are  generally  found  in  rivers,  lakes, 
deep  or  marshy  places. 

11.  The  ICdiatriyas  shall  vvetir  red  or  yellow  dia¬ 
monds  ;  the  Brahmins  shall  wear  white  diamonds;  the  Vy si- 
as  shall  wear  diamonds  which  are  slight, y  yellow  and  the 
S'Jdras  shall  wear  those  which  are  black. 

12  &  13.  Eight  mustard  seeds  (white)  make  a  TVndula. 
The  price  of  a  diamond  weighing  20  Tandulas  is  200,000 
Karshapa.aas  ;  ( l )  and  the  price  ot’  diamonds  weighing  two 
taudulas  less  and  less  arc  respectively  three  fourths, 
two-thirds,  one-half,  one-third,  one-fifth,  one-sixteenth* 
one  twenty- fifth,  one-hundredth  and  one-thousandth  parts 
of  il 00,000  Karshapanas. 

Notes.  The  following  table  shews  the  price  of  dia¬ 
monds  : — 


Weight  in 

Price  in  K  am. 

Weight  in 

Price  in  Kara* 

Tandulas. 

ahapanas. 

Tn  nclui&s. 

Shavian &b> 

2<> 

200.000 

in 

40  000 

18 

160,000 

8 

12,500 

Ifi 

133,338 

r> 

8,000 

It 

100,000 

4 

2,000 

12 

6  f  i,6  Ob 

o 

U 

200 

For  intermediate  weight,  the  price  shall  bo  deter¬ 
mined  by  proportion. 

14-  A.  superior  diamond  is  one  which  cannot  be  bro¬ 
ken  with  any  other  substance,  which  in  light  and  dazzling, 
which  is  of  the  color  of  lightning,  fire  or  rain-bow  and  which 
floats  in  water.  It  always  brings  prosperity. 

i5.  The  faults  of  the  diamond  are,  linos  of  the  shape 
of  the  foot  of  the  crow,  a  fly  or  a  hare  or  being  mixed  with 
other  minerals,  or  covered  with  holes  like  gravel,  being 
with  split  ends,  appearing  soiled  or  with  dark  spots  and 


(a  )  Tbo  mantras  peered  to  particular  deyas  shall  first  bo  pronounced 
and  the  diamonds  shall  then  bo  worn. 

(b).  A  Kafsh&pana  is  20  Km.  os  it  obtains  among  merchants.  It  is  a 
gold  coin  whose  weight  is  16  Mashas  e  jed  to  or '‘-fourth  pain. 


34.'! 


BRXfTAT  SAMITITA 


ig: 


eiag  of  unsteady  light  or  split  or  broken.  So  oh  diamonds 
are  not  fit  for  use. 

K‘>.  Diamonds  with  bubbles  or  split  ends  or  flat  and 
long-  shall  be  priced  one-eighth  less  than  the  price  assigned 

17.  Persons  learned  in  the  science  say  that  a  woman 
desirous  ol  sons  shall  wear  diamonds.  According  to  so  me 
diamonds  ar©  not  to  be  worn  at  all ;  diamonds  of  the  shape 
of  the  fruit  of  Sringata,  of  the  pulse,  of  the  coriander  seed, 
and  of  the  hip-bone  shall  be  worn  by  women  desirous  of  sons. 

IS-  A  person  wearing  bad  diamonds,  will  lose  bis  peo¬ 
ple,  wealth  and  life.  Good  diamonds  worn  by  kings  will  free 
them  from  the  attacks  of  lightning,  poison,  and  enemies  and 
will  briug  great  prosperity. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV  (81). 

On  Pearls. 

1.  Pearls  are  produced  in  elephants,  serpents,  oyster- 
shells,  fish,  clouds,  bamboos,  whales,  and  boars.  Of  those, 
pearls  of  tbo  oyster-fish  are  produced  in  abundance  and  are 
beautiful. 

2.  Ceylon,  the  island  of  Paralopfcika,  Surat,  the  Tatn- 
braparni  river,  Persia,  the  isle  of  Kubera,  the  country  of 
Pandyavata  and  the  Himalayas,  are  places  in  which  pearls 
are  largely  found. 

o.  I  ho  pearls  cf  Ceylon  are  of  various  shapes,  glossy 
of  the  color  of  the  swan  and  large.  The  pearls  found  in 

tne  mouths  of  the  Taiubraparni  are  white  or  slightly  copper 
colored  and  pure. 

4.  j  ho  pearls  of  t  I  of  Paraloukika  are  black, 
White  or  yellow,  mixed  with  minerals  and  rough ;  the  pearls 
of  Surat  are  neither  very  large  nor  very  small  and  of  the 
color  of  butter. 

n  Persian  pearls  are  bright,  white,  heavy,  and  of 
excellent  qualities.  The  Himalayan  pearls  are  light,  brittle, 
ot  the  odor  of  curdled  milk,  large,  and  of  various  shapes. 


G.  The  pearls  of  the  isle  of  lvubera  are  rough,  black, 
white,  light,  large  and  bright;  and  those  of  Pandya  Valaka 
are  of  the  color  of  the  fruit  of  the  margoGa,  resembling  a 
pulse  or  the  coriander  seech 

7.  Pearls  which  are  blue  are  sacred  to  Vishnu  and 
those  which  are  white  like  the  ’Moon  arc  sacred  to  Indra ; 
those  which  are  yellow  are  sacred  to  Varuna  and  those 
which  are  black  are  sacred  to  Yama. 

8.  Pearls  which  are  red  like  the  ripe  frnifcs  of  the 
pomegranate  or  the  cocoon  of  the  silk  worm  or  the  gnnja 
seeds  (Abrus  Precatorius)  are  sacred  to  Vayu  and  those 
which  are  of  the  color  of  the  flame  of  fire  or  of  the  lotus 
flower  are  sacred  to  Agui. 

9.  The  price  of  a  superior  pearl  weighing  four  Mas¬ 
has  (a)  is  5,300  karshapanas. 

10.  The  prices  of  pearls  weighing  half  amasha  less 
and  less  are  respectively  3,200,  2,000,  1,200,  800,  and  353 
karshapanas. 

11.  The  price  of  a  single  pearl  which  is  a  masha  in 
weight  is  135  Karshapanas,  and  the  price  of  a  pearl  which  is 
4  gunjas  in  weight  is  90  karshapanas,  and  that  of  one  which 
is  3”  gunjas  in  weight  is  70  karshapanas. 

12.  The  price  of  a  pearl  which  is  3  ganjas  in  weight 
is  50  ka&hapanas,  and  the  price  of  a  pearl  which  is  21  gun¬ 
jas  in  weight  is  35  karshapanas. 

13.  One-tenth  of  a  pala  is  known  as  a  Dharana.  The 
price  of  a  collection  or  string  of  13  good  pearls  weighing  a 
Dharana  is  325  karshapanas. 

14.  The  price  of  a  string  of  16  pearls  weighing  a 
Dharana  is  200  karshapanas ;  of  20  pearls  of  the  same  weight 
is  170  karsha  panas  ;  of  23  pearls  of  the  same  weight  is  130 
karshapanas. 


( a).  A  imu4ia  is  equal  to  D  gm\ja  seeds  or 


EfttHAT  S  Ail  HIT  A 


1CU 


15.  The  price  of  a,  string  of  30  superior  pearls  weigh¬ 
ing  a  Dharaua  is  70  karshapanas.  One  of  40  pearls  of  the 
same  weight  is  50  karshapanas  and  one  of  55  pearls  of  the 
•same  weight  is  40  karshapanas. 

1(>.  The  price  of  a  string  of  80  pearls  weighing  a 
Pharana  is  30  karshapanas  ;  that  of  a  string  of  100  poarls 
of  the  same  weight  is  25  karshapanas  ;  of  200  pearls  of  the 
same  weight  is  1*2  karshapanas  ;  of  300  pearls,  6  karshapa- 
nas  ;  of  400,  5  karshapanas,  and  of  500,  3  karshapanas. 

17.  A  collection  or  string  of  13  pearls  weighing  a 
Dharaoa  is  known  as  Pikka ;  one  of  1 6  pearls  of  the  same 
weight  is  known  as  Piccfca one  of  20  pearls  is  known  as 
Aidua  ;  one  of  25  is  known  as  Argba  ,  one  of  30  as  Ttavaka  ; 
one  of  40  as  S'kta ;  ono  of  55  as  Nigra ;  ono  of  from  80  to 
500  pearls  is  known  as  Cburna, 

Notes. 

According  to  Buddha  Bhata  the  price  of  a  superior 
pearl  weighing  5  mashas  is  double  the  price  of  one  weighing 
4  mashns,  and  the  price  of  a  pearl  weighing  6  masha3  is 
double  the  price  of  one  of  omashas,  and  so  on,  doubling  the 
price  for  each  additional  weight  of  a  masha. 

18.  Thus  have  I  described  the  price  of  various  collec¬ 
tions  of  superior  pearls  weighing  a  Dharana.  The  prices  of 
collections  of  pearls  of  intermediate  numbers  shall  bo  rise  a v* 
taioed  by  proportion-  If  the  poarls  bo  not  of  superiorqua- 
lity,  the  price  shall  be  reduced. 

19.  If  these  superior  pearls  be  black  or  white  or 
slightly  rough  the  price  shall  be  reduced  by  a  third  ;  if  they 
be  only  very  rough  the  price  shall  be  reduced  by  a  sixth  ; 
and  if  yellow  by  one-half. 

20.  An  elephant  of  the  Iravaba  family  born  when  the 
Moon  possess  through  the  astorism  of  Pushy  a  or  Sravana, 
on  a  Sunday  or  Monday  in  the  Uttarayana  (i.  e.  when  tho 


22 


70 


BKIHAT  SAMHITA 


[OJT.  S' 


L 


S  a  a. passes  from  sign  Capricorn  to  sign  Cancer)  and  at  the 
solar  or  lunar  eclipse  is  known  as  Bhadra. 

21.  Pearls  which  are  bright,  of  tfaiJous  shapes  and 
large  aro  produced  in  largo  quantities  in  the  tusks,  testi 
cles  and  crests  of  the  Bhadra  elephant. 

22-  These  pearls  cannot  be  valued  and  cannot  bo 
bored  through.  They  are  exceedingly  bright  and  will  bring 
to  the  wearer  success,  health  and  sons,  and  make  him  pure. 
They  are  fit  to  be  worn  by  kings. 

23.  Pearls  of  superior  qualities  and  of  the  color  of  the 
moon  are  produced  at  the  roots  of  the  hog’s  teeth  and  pearls 
of  good  qualities  and  which  are  large,  pure,  and  of  the  shape 
of  the  eye  of  the  fish  are  found  in  whales. 

24.  Pearls  of  the  shape  of  the  hail  and  which  fall  from 
ib o  seventh  region  of  the  atmosphere  and  resembling  the 
lightning  aro  produced  .in  clouds;  they  are  carried  away  by 
the  Devaa. 

2c.  Pearls  are  also  produced  in  the  heads  of  serpents 
of  the  family  of  Takshaka  and  Vasuki;  they  are  black  and 
glossy. 

2d.  When  the  rain-fall  occurs  out  of  season,  pearls 
which  fall  from  the  sky  into  vessels  of  silver  placed  on  pure 
spots  aro  known  as  Naga  pearls. 

Notes — According  to  Buddha  Bhata  rain  may  be  pro¬ 
duced  in  the  dry  season  as  follows  :  the  priest  shall,  ‘after 
bathing,  and  in  an  auspicious  hour  get  to  the  tops  of  storied 
buildings  whoso  floor  reflects  the  sky  above  and  shall  recite 
aloud,  mantras  accompanied  by  the  music  of  the  Dundabhi. 
Heavy  rain  will  fall. 


27.  The  Naga  pearls  worn  by  kings  bring  to  them 
success,  renowu,  the  ruin  of  the  enemy  and  freedom  from 
misery. 


.  84]  BKIHAT  SAMHITA. 

28.  Pearls  produced  in  bamboos  aro  of  tho  color  of. 
camphor  or  crystal,  and  are  flat  and  rough.  Those  produce; 
in  conch-shell  are  of  the  color  of  the  Moon  and  round,  bright 

and  beautiful. 

29.  Pearls  produced  in  conch- sheila,  whales,  bamboos, 
elephants,  hogs,  serpents  and  clouds  aro  not  to  be  bored 
through.  As  they  are  of  very  superior  qualities,  the  sastias 
have  not  stated  their  value. 

SO.  All  these  aro  pearls  of  superior  qualities,  and  they 
make  the  wearer  wise,  wealthy,  happy  and  renowned,  free 
him  from  diseases  and  grief  and  secure  for  kings  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  their  desire. 

31  A  collection  of  pearls  consisting  of  1,008  strings, 
each  4  cubits  long  is  known  as  Indra  Chhanda.  This  must 
be  used  as  ornaments  for  the  Devaa  only.  A  collection  of 
pearls  consisting  of  504  strings  each  2  cubits  long  is  known 
as  Vi jfty a  Chhanda. 

32,  A  collection  of  poarls  consisting  of  108  strings  . 
each  2  cubits  long  is  known  as  a  Kara ;  one  of  81  sti’ings  of 
the  same  length  is  known  as  Dova  Chhanda ;  one  of  (>4 
strings  is  known  as  Ardha-hara ;  and  one  of  54  is  known 
as  Has.rni  Kalapa. 

33.  A  collection  of  pearls  consisting  of  32  strings  each 
2  cubits  long  is  known  as  Ouccha;  one  of  20  strings  is 
known  as  Aruba-  Goccha  ,*  one  of  10  as  Mnnavaka. ;  arid  one 
of  12  as  Ardhamanavaka. 

3,4.  A  collection  of  pearls  consisting  of  8  strings  each 
two  cubits  long  is  known  as  Mandaia,  and  one  of  5  strings  . 
is  known  as  Haraphalaka  and  a  necklace,  a  cubit  in  length, 
consisting  of  a  string  of  27  pearls  is  known  as  a  Nakshatra 
Main- 

35.  A  Nakshtra  Mala  with  gems  or  gold  beads  be¬ 
tween  the  pearls  is  known  as  Mnnisopana.  A  Mauisopaim 
with  a  central  gem  is  known  as  Chatakava- 


*172 


BRHUT  SAMHITl, 


M.  35. 


36.  A  necklace,  a  cubit  in  length  and  consisting  of 
an  indefinite  number  of  pearls  is  known  as  Ekavali.  An 
Ekavali  with  a  central  gom  is  known  as  Yasbti  among 
Jewel-merchants. 

n—iow 

CHAPTER  XXXV  (82). 

0.v  Rubiks. 

3.  Rubies  are  formed  from  Sougandbika,  from  Kurn- 
vinda,  and  from  crystals.  The  Sougandbika  rubies  are  of 
the  color  of  the  bee,  collyrtum,  clouds  or  the  fruit  of  the 
rose-apple,  and  are  glossy. 

2.  The  Kurnvinda  rubies  are  of  the  color  of  the  mix. 
tare  of  black  and  white,  somewhat  bright  and  mixed  with 
minerals,  and  the  crystalline  rubies  are  bright,  pure  and  of 
different  colors. 

3.  Rubies  of  superior  quality  are  blight,  glossy,  pure, 
rod,  and  rendering  red  objects  around,  dazzling,  heavy, 
well-shaped  and  of  good  water. 

4.  Gems  that  are  dim,  slightly  bright,  with  lines, 
mixed  with  minerals  or  with  gravel,  or  broken  are  not  good 
ones.  These  are  the  faults  of  gems. 

5.  A  gom  of  the  color  of  the  bee,  the  nock  of  the 
peacock  or  the  tip  of  Hume,  if  fouud  in  the  head  of  a  ser¬ 
pent  lias  no  value. 

6.  A  king  who  wears  such  a  gem  will  never  Buffer 
from  the  attacks  of  poison  and  disease.  There  will  bo  rain¬ 
fall  in  his  couufrry  every  day  in  the  year  and  the  king’s 
onemios  will  meet  with  ruin— -all  this  through  the  virtues 
of  the  gem. 

The  price  of  a  ruby  weighing  a  pal  a  is  26,000 
karahapanas,  and  the  price  o  a  ruby  weighing  three  har¬ 
sh  %8  (a)  [£  of  a  pula]  is  20,000  karshapanas. 


fa) ,  16  Mosbap  **  l  -karslm . 

4  Karshus'^1  pa> 


fk.  SC,] 


BRtlUT  SAMHtTA. 


273 


K  the  weight  be  two  kardbas  a  pala)  tftfe  price  is 
12,000  k.  pan  as  ;  if  the  weight  be  a  karsha,  the  price  is 
6,000  k.  paring,  and  if  the  weight,  be  8  Mashas,  the  price  ia 
,000  lc .  pan  as. 

9.  If  the  weight  be  4  Masha?,  the  price  ia  3,000  fc. 
panrrs,  and  i 1  it  be  2  Mashas,  the  price  is  500  k.  panas-  For 
rubies  of  intermediate  weighty  the  price  shall  be  ascertained 
by  proportion.  The  price  of  rubies  winch  fall  a  little  short 
of  being  superior  rubles  is  as  follows  : 

10.  If  the  fault  be  a  defect  in  color,  the  price  shall 
be  reduced  to  one-half ;  if  the  gem  bo  not  bright  and 
glossy,  the  price  shall  be  reduced  to  one-eighth,  and  if  the 
gem  possess  very  few  good  qualities  but  many  faults,  the 
price  shall  be  reduced  to  one-twentieth. 

i  I .  If  the  gem  be  wholly  red  fc^ck  and  full  of  wounds 
aud  if  tho  good  qualities  bo  very  few,  the  price  shall  bo  re¬ 
duced  to  a  two-hundredth  part.  Thus  has  been  described 
tue  valuation  of  rubies  by  the  ancient  writers. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI  (83). 

On  Emeralds. 

.  Emeralds  of  the  col  or  of  the  parrot,  tho  leaves  of 
the  bamboo,  the  bark  of  the  plantain  and  the  flower  of  Si- 
l  isha  (Acacia  iSirisa)  and  of  good  quality  will  conduce  to 
prosperity  if  they  are  worn  by  men  on  occasions  of  worship 
of  the  Devas  and  the  Pitris. 

Notes- 

Emeralds  aro  to  bo  valued  in  the  same  way  as  rubies. 
According  to  Cudhabbata,  the  five  chief  gems  are  diamonds, 
pearls,  rubies,  emeralds  and  sapphires.  Sapphires  must  bo 
examinod  in  fch©  same  way  as  rubies,  Mahan  ill  h  a  gem 
which  when  put  into  milk  turns_  it  blue.  OUhe  price  of 


BUI  HAT  SAM.HITA- 


tc 


!H.  37. 


ruby  weighing  a  Manila  kite  price  of  a  sapphire  weighing 
a  S warn  a  (a). 

Vy  clary  a  ('the  catVeye  gem)  is  of  the  color  of  the  tail 
«of  the  peacock,  the  leaves  of  the  bamboo  or  tho  wing  of  the 
king-fisher.  It  is  to  be  valued  in  the  same  way  as  flap* 
ph  es. 

Kurketaiia  gems  are  bright,  glossy,  pure,  yellow  and 
heavy.  The  usual  test  of  its  superiority  is  to  cover  the 
stone  with  gold  leaf  and  put  it  in  fire.  Tho  gem  will  be¬ 
come  black  but.  will  not  lose  its  gloss  The  whole  Earth 
might  be  given  for  this  gem. 

Crystal  gems  are  white  like  the  stem  of  tho  lotus  or 
tho  couch-shell. 


Corals  are  glossy,  pure  and  red-  Tho  wearer  will  bo- 
come  wealthy  and  will  bo  freed  from  poison. 

Rudhiraksha  gems  are  green  in  the  middle,  white  all 
round,  as  bright  as  sapphire,  of  tho*  shape  of  tho  fruit  of 
the  Pilu  tree  (Caroa  Arborea).  It  will  make  the  wearer 
wealthy  and  well-served.  For  further  particulars  regarding 
go  ms,  tho  reader  is  referred  to  the  works  of  Buddhabhata. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI 1  (84). 

Os  Lamps. 

1.  A  lamp  whose  flame  turns  from  right  to  loft,  wnoso 
light  is  dim  and  small,  and  emits  sparks  and  which  dies  exit 
even  when  the  oil  and  tho  wick  are  pure  indicates  evil.  A 
lamp  whose  flame  is  quivering,  spreading  and  attended 
with  noise  and  which  dies  out  in  the  absence  of  the  hy  or 
the  wind  also  indicates  evil. 

,2.  If  the  flame  be  close  and  united,  long,  still,  bright, 
without  noise,  beautiful,  turning  from  left  to  right  and  of 

('it).  Swarna---  1  Karsha *16  Mashas  »  SO  Ilaktikas «•  about  175  gr&ina 
Troy: 


:# 


BRIHAX  SAMHHA. 


tho  color  of  vydurya  or  gold,  it  indicates  approaching  pros¬ 
perity.  In  other  respects  all  that  has  been  said  in  the  case 


of  fire  applies  here  also. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII  (85) 


On  Tooth-brush. 


1,  Tooth-brush  may  be  made  of  the  twigs  of  spread¬ 
ing  creepers,  creepers,  shrubs  and  trees.  A  description  of 
all  their  effects  will  be  long  and  elaborate.  We  shall  there¬ 


fore  confine  ourself  to  twigs  which  are  to  ba  chewed  to 
secure  certain  special  ends. 


2,  Twigs  of  unknown  trees  aboil  he  rejected,  and 


twigs  with  leaves,  those  of  an  even  number  of  joints,  those 
which  are  split  or  dry  at  the  ends  and  those  with  no  bark 
ought  not  to  be  chewed. 

3.  The  twigs  of  Vikankata  (a),  Sripbala  (5),  and  Kas- 
mari  (c),  if  chewed,  will  give  a  person  Brahminical  splen¬ 
dour.  The  twigs  of  K’shema  will  secure  to  a  person  a  good 
wife.  The  twigs  of  the  banyan  will  increase  a  person’s 
wealth  and  stock  of  grain.  The  Arka  twig  will  increase 
the  splendour  of  his  appearance.  The  Madhuku  twig  will 
give  him  a  son  The  Kakubba  will  add  to  his  joy. 

4.  The  twigs  of  Sirisha  and  Karan] a  if  used  as  tooth¬ 
brush  will  make  a  person  wealthy  and  prosperous.  Those 
of  Piaksha  will  bring  him  money.  Those  of  Aswattha  will 
make  him  respected  by  the  people  and  renowned  among  hie 
own  caste-men. 


(a)  .  ViL’inkn.ta  :  Plaoonrtia  Bap'da. 

(b) .  Sriplmla  :  the  Bilwa  trc^. 

( cj .  Ka^mari :  tUe  plant  GmeUaa  Arberea, 


JP  BlllHAT  SAM  HIT  A  CH.  38. 

y.  The  twig  of  the  Badari  if  chewed  as  a  tooth-brush 
will  roako  a  person  healthy;  tha;  of  the  Brihati  (a)  will 
give  him  a  long  life  ;  that  of  the  Kbadira  and  Bilwa  will 
iucrease  hia  wealth  ;  that  of  the  Atimukfca  and  Kadumba 
will  bring  him  the  object  of  his  desire, 

0.  The  twig  of  the  Nimba  if  chewed  as  a  tooth-brush 
will  bring  wealth  to  a  person  ;  that  of  the  Karavira  will 
bring  him  go  >d  meals  ;  that  of  the  Bhandira  (5)  wiii  bring 
him  much  food  ;  that  of  the  Sami,  Arjuna  and  Syama  will 
destroy  his  enemies. 

7.  The  twig  of  Aswakarna,  Bhadrataru  (c)  and 
Chaiamsliaka  if  chewed  as  a  tooth-brush  will  bring  a  man 
dignity;  those  of  Priyangu,  (d)  Apamarga,  Jambu  and  Dadi- 
luawili  make  a  person  boloved  of  all  people. 

8-  Facing  the  north  or  the  east,  a  person  shall  chew  the 
tooth-brush  and  cleanse  his  teeth,  for  a  year,  firmly  placing 
before  his  mind  his  object  of  desire.  He  shall,  after  its 
use,  wash  the  tooth-brush  with  water  and  throw  it  in  a 
pure  spot. 

9.  If  the  tooth-brush  when  thrown  away  after  its  use  be 
seen  to  stick  to  the  ground  with  one  end  w  hile  tho  other  end 
points  to  him  and  in  a  Santa  (benefic)  quarter  (vide  stanza 
12,  next  Chap.)  prosperity  is  indicated;  if  it.  should  stick  for 
a  time  and  then  fall,  the  person  will  get  good  meals  and  if 
it  fall  otherwise  the  person  will  suffer  miseries. 

Brihati  :  the  Egg  plant* 

The  other  trees  occnmog  in  this  Chapter  have  already  been  ex¬ 
plained.  Vide  Glossary  of  Botanical  terms — pages  66  to  74,  Part  II. 

Cl).  Bhandira :  Enina  MtmjisUa. 

(c).  Bha&ramrn  ;  the  plant  Trapa  Bispmosa. 
m  Apamarga  ;  the  plant  Achyranthes  Aapera. 


BRIM  AT  SAUmVA. 


177 


On  Omens  .FxiiauEtively  Treated- 

I 

CHAPTER  XXXrX  (86). 

GeKBBAL  H(JLB3. 

1.  Ekbabha  Las  written  a  treatise  on  omens  cmbody- 
ing  the  views  of  the  Devas  Sukra,  Jndra,  Brihaapati, 
Kapishtbala  and  Garuda  and  of  the  Eialiis  Bhngurj,  Bevala 
and  others. 

Sridevavardhaua,  the  Maharaja  of  Avanti  (Oojien  ') 
has  written  a  treatise’  on  omens  embodying  the  views  of 
Bharadwaja. 

S.  There  are  also  treatises  on  omens  by  the  seven  L'i- 
shis  ;  numerous  treatises  are  also  found  on  tho!  subject 
written  in  ancient  and  modern  languages.  Then,  there  are 
the  treatises  of  Garga  and  others  who  have  written  works 
on  Samhita.  There  are  also  treaties  written  by  writers 
who  have  written  works  on  Yatra. 

*.  Having  examined  ail  the  above  treatises  I  proceed 
to  write  clearly  this  brief  treatise  on  omens  for  the  enlighten 
went  of  my  pupils. 

o.  Omens  indicate  to  travellers  the  good  or  evil  effects 
of  their  Jcarma  (deeds)  in  a  former  b;rth.  * 


6.  Omens  are  matures  dwelling  in  villages  and  foreste 
in  waters., lin  land,  in  tho  sky,  moving  by  day  or  by  night 
or  by  both  day  and  night.  Their  sex  shall  be  ascertained  by 
their  sound,  gait,  look  aud  speech. 

7.  It  is  often  difficult  to  ascertain  thejsex  of  the  crea¬ 
ture  aud  .tho  Rishis  have  laid  down  general  rules  for  the 
purpose  in  the  following  two  stanzas. 

8.  Tho  male  creatures  are  generally,  those  possessing 
large,  high  and  broad  shoulders,  large  neck,  fine  breast, 
short  but  deep  sound  and  uniform  gait- 


23 


is  w  -  fq£:v  \ ‘  <W’ 

}>,  BUI  HAT  SAMHIT*.  fC’fl.  091. 

1).  The  female  creatutos  are  those  possessing  a  small 
neck,  head  and  breast  ;  also  a  small  face,  legs  and  strength  r 
ad  also,  a  shrill  but  soft  sound.  Other  creatures  belong  to 
neither  sex. 

10.  In  the  present  treatise  on  omens  I  shall  confine 
myself  to  matters  relating  to  travels.  What  are  domestic 
animals  and  what  wild  shall  be  ascertained  from  a  general 
knowledge  of  creatures. 

11.  The  effects  of  omens  occurring  In  roads  affect  the 
traveller  and  those  of  omens  occurring  in  armies  affect  the 
king-  Omens  occurring  in  towns  affect  the  king  or  the 
village  deity!  and  omens  occurring  before  a  gathering  of 
men  affect  the  leader  ;  if  there  bo  no  leader  and  it  the  per- 
B..n-v  bo  all  of  equal  rank  those  of  superior  caste,  education 
or  age  will  be  affected  by  the  omens. 

12.  Dividing  the  circle  of  horizon  into  eight  equal 
quarters  beginning  frum  the  east  and  going  round,  corres- 
I  tending  to  the  eight  Famas  (a  yama is  <1  hours)  fioiu  sunrise 
to  sunrise,  the  quarter  which  corresponds  to  a  particular 
yama  of  the  Sun  in  his  daily  motion  is  known  as  ileepta 
(malefic).  The  quarter  next  before  it  just  quitted  by  the 
San  is  known  as  Angara  and  the  quarter  next  after  Deepta 
is  known  as  Dhumini.  The  other  five  quarters  are  known 
f,s  Santa  (benefic).  The  first  three,  vis-,  the  Aug  iri,  the 
Deepta  and  Dhumini  quarters  relate  to  had  events  past, 
present  and  future  respectively  according  as  the  omen 
occurs  in  such  quarters.  («)• 

13.  Omens  occurring  in  the  three  5th  (opposite)  quar 
tors  from  the  D-epta  quarters  relate  to  good  events  past, 
present  and  f  uture.  If  the  omen  occur  in  one  of  the  re¬ 
maining  two  quarters,  the  effects  are  good  or  bad  according 

(c>)>  Thfc  threo  quarters  are  sDmetiaa*a  spoken  of  as  Beepta  quarters. 


BUI  HA!}'  SAMJI'ITA. 


■ft, a  the  place  more  approaches  the  Santa  or  the  Deepta  qnur- 
•ter. 

14,  Effect, a  of  omena  occurring  ia  low  places  will  be 

felt  soon  ;  those  of  omena  occurring  in  high  places  will  in* 
felt  late.  The  increase  or  the  decrease  will  follow  the 
increasing  or  the  decreasing  character  of  the  place  occupied 
by  the  omen- 

16.  If  the  hour,  the  lunar  day,  the  Nakshatra,  the 
wind  and  the  sun  be  malefic,  the  omen  is  known  as  Deivu 
Deepta  (a)  and  the  effects  will  be  of  an  increasingly  evil 
character.  If  the  gait,  place,  sound  and  motion  of  the  omen 
as  well  as  the  memory  (of  the  Astrologer)  to  bad,  the  omen 
is  known  as  Kria  Deepta  (h)  and  the  effects  will  also  bo 
of  an  increasingly  evil  character, 

Notes. 

(a) .  That  is  if,  at  the  time  of  occurrence  of  an  omen, 
the  hour  be  that  of  a  malefic  planet,  the  lunar  day  be  a 
malefic  ouo,  the  Moon  pass  through  a  malefic  asterbrn,  the 
wind  blow  hard  and  the  Sun  occupy  a  malefic  quarter. 

(b) .  That  is,  if  at  the  time,  the  gait  of  the  animal  or 
bird  be  bad  or  directed  towards  bad  places,  if  the  place 
occupied  by  the  omen  be  bad,  if  the  person’s  memory  fail, 
if  the  sound  of  the  animal  or  bird  be  hoarse  and  if  it 
should  strike  its  legs  or  wings  cr  scratch  its  face  and  do 
the  like. 


16.  If  the  character  of  the  omen  bo  the  opposite  p $ 
what  has  been  described  above,  the  omen  is  kuown  as  Delve, 
$antc<  or  Kria  Santa  respectively.  Creatures  subsisting  on 
leaves  aud  fruits  are  known  as  Soumya  (benefic);  and  those 
subsisting  on  flesh  aud  excrement  are  known  as  .Koudra 
(malefic);  and  creatures  subsisting  on  lice  and  other  grain* 
are  known  as  Sankirna  (mixed). 


BE! WAT  SAKtHITA  [Cfl«  3 

.  Omtnres  Hound  in  stoned  houses,  fcornples,  palaces 
of  kiog.j,  places  of  marriage  and  the  like.  In  beautiful  spots 
and  on  trees  where  theroi may  be  honey.,  juice,  milk,  fruits 
or  flowers  indicate  good  luck. 

18.  It  day-creatures  be  seen  to  occupy  the  tops  of 
li'lis  by  day,  the  effects  will  be  strong;  if  night  creatures 
bo  seen  to  occupy  waters  by  night  fcfio  effects  will  be 
strong.  The  effects  will  be  of  increasing  strength  accord- 
ing  as  the  creature  is  a  hermaphrodite,  a  female  or  a  male. 

Iff.  Creatures  remarkable  for  speed,  genius,  strength, 
place  occupied,  merriment,  nobleness  of  mind  or  good 
sound  are  strong  when  in  their  own  places  ;  the  same  rule 
applies  to  useful  animals.  If  the  character  of  the  creatures 
bo  otherwise  or  it'  they  ho  injurious  and  if  they  do  not 
occupy  their  own  places,  they  are  weak. 

20.  The  cock,  the  elephant,  the  parili,  the  peacock, 
the  vanjnla,  the  musk-rat,  the  duck  and  the  kutapoori  are 
strong  in  the  east. 

:  1.  The  jackal,  the  owl,  the  haritala  pigeon,  the 
crow,  the  ruddy  goose,  the  bear,  ichoumon,  the  dove,  as 
well  as  moans,  cries  and  disagreeable  sounds  are  strong  in 
the  south. 

•  The  ram,  the  swan,  the  osprey,  the  francoline 
partridge,  the  cat,  as  well  as  festivities,  music  aud  laughter 
are  strong  in  the^wewt* 

23.  The  crane,  the  deer,  the  rat,  the  antelope,  the 
horse,  the  cuckoo,  die  blue  jay  and  the  hedgehog  as  well  as 
tho  sound  of  sweet-bo!  U  and  of  the  couch-shell  are  strong 
in  the  north. 

2-t.  Wild  ore:. turns  shall  not  be  treated  as  domestic  if 
t  hey  ore  found  in  tOwi;s,Jand  domestic  creatures  shall  not  bo 
to  ated  as  wild  if  they  are  found  ia  woods.  Similarly,  day- 


ir.  30.] 


BRIIfAT  SAMHIXA 


creatures  shall  not  bo  confounded,  with  night  creatures  and 
vice  versa. 

do  Creatures  afflicted  with  the  Dwandwa  (eopula- 
tion  ?)  disease,  frightened  animals  and  those  that  go  about 
seeking  tor  fight  or  prey  as  well  as  creatures  separated  by 
a  river  and  rutting  animals  shall  not  be  treated  as  omens. 

26.  Tho  fox,  the  goat,  the  ass,  the  deer,  the  camel f 
the  antelope  and  the  hare  shall  not  be  treated  as  omens  in 
the  Sisira  season  (from  middle  * of  January  to  middle  of 
March).  The  crow  and  tho  cuckoo  shall  not  be  treated  as 
omens  in  tho  Vasanta  season  (from  middle  of  March  to  that 
of  May). 

27-  Tho  pig,  the  dog,  the  wolf  and  the  like  shall  not 
bo  treated  as  omens  in  the  month  of  Bhadrapada  (middle 
of  August  to  middle  of  September)  nor  shall  the  Abjada, 
tho  cow  and  the  curlew  be  treated  as  omens  in  the  Sarat 
season  (midd  le  of  September  to  the  middle  of  November  ;) 
nor  the  elephant  and  the  Cliataka  (Ouculus  Melanoleucus) 
bo  treated  as  omens  in  the  month  o£  Sravana  (July— 
August). 

28k  The  tiger,  the  bear,  tho  monkey,  the  leopard,  the 
buffalo,  and  tho  serpent,  ns  well  ns  tho  young  of  animals 
other  than  human  shad !  not  be  treated  as  omens  in  the 
Heraanfca  season  (from  middle  of  November  to  middle  of 
January). 


29.  Tho  space  between  the  eastern  and  tbo  south¬ 
eastern  points  of  the  horizon  shall  bo  divided  into  4  equal 
parts  by  three  points.  Those  points  are  known  respec¬ 
tively  as  those  of  Kosadhynksha,  A  na’ajivi  and  Tnpoyuktn. 

cO.  The  space  between  the  south-eastern  and  southern 
points  of  tho  horizon  shall  be  divided  similarly  by  three 
points  known  respectively  as  those  of  Silpi,  Bhik.  hu  and 
Yivastra  Stri  and  the  three  points  between  tbo  southern  and 


Pail II AT  SAMHITA. 


Off.  30* 


the  south-western  points  of  the  horizon  me  known  aa  those 
of  M  a  tango,  Cropa  and  Dharmasamasraya. 

31.  The  space  between  the  south-western  and  western 
points  shall  be  Similarly  divided  by  three  points  known  as 
those  of  Sbri,  Sufci  and  Taskara;  and  the  three  points 
between  the  western  and  the  north-western  points  of  the 
horizon  are  known  as  those  of  Souudika,  Sakuai  and 
Mimsra. 


32.  The  space  between  the  north-western  and  north¬ 
ern  points  of  the  horizon  shall  be  similarly  divided  by 
•three  points  known  as  those  of  Vishaghatakn,  Goswami 
and  Euhakagoa  ;  and  the  three  points  between  the  nortU- 
orr  and  north-eastern  points  of  the  horizon  are  known  as 
those  of  D ha n avail,  Eekshanaka  and  Malakara. 

33.  The  space  between  the  north-eastern  and  eastern 
points  of  the  horizon  shall  be  divided  equally  by  three 
points  known  as  tlioso  of  Vyshuav&j  Ohuraku  and  \  ajiralc- 
skaka.  These  twenty-four  points  together  with  the  eight 
points  of  the  compass  give  us  thirty-two  quarters  in  all. 

34.  The  eight  points  of  the  compass  beginning  from 
•the  oast  and  going  round  are  known  as  those  of  the  king 
.(E),  the  first  prince  (S-E).,  the  commander  of  armies  (8), 
the  messenger  (8  W.),  the  headman  (W.),  a  spy  (N.W),  a 


hrah min  (N.),  and  an  elephant  driver  (N.E.) 

Again,  the  four  points  of  the  compass  are  known  as 
tlioso  of  the  Kshafcriyas  (E.),  the  Vysiyas  (S.),  the  Sudras 
(W.)  and  the  Bralunius  (N-) 

35.  The  omen  in  a  particular  quarter  indicates  that 
the  person  who  observes  it  whether  he  bo  going  or  seated 
will  soon  meet  with  the  person  presiding  over  such  quarter. 

3J.  If  the  sound  of  the  creature  be  broken,  timid, 
low,  caused  by  pain,  harsh,  feeble  or  dull,  it  indicates  evil. 
The  natural  sound  of  a  joyous  animal  indicates  prosperity. 


BEIH.VT  SAMHTTA  183 

^9/  ~  ■  ■  . 

87.  The  jackal  the  cuckoo,  the  JEfealft,  the  eituohu,  the 
icheumon,  the  limrd,  the  sow,  the  Kokila,  and  the  male  of 
animals  and  birds  in  general  indicate  good  luck  when  on 
the  left  side 

SB.  The  vulture,  the  dog,  the  monkey,  the  Srikavna, 
the  musk-rat ,  the  peacock,  the  Sreckantha,  the  1  ippika, 
the  Rura,  the  hawk  and  the  females  of  animals  aud  birds 
indicate  good  luck  when  on  the  right  side. 

39-  Hissing  sound,  clapping  of  hands,  auspicious 
music,  and  tho  sound  of  the  couch-shell  indicate  good  luck 
when  on  the  left  side.  Other  auspicious  sounds  indicate 
good  luck  when  ou  tho  right  side. 

40.  The  madhyama,  shadja  and  gandhara  notes 
indicate  good  luck ;  the  shadja,  madbyama,  gandhara  and 
rishbha  notes  also  indicate  good  luck. 

Notes- — The  gandhara  note  is  found  only  in  I)cva 
Loka.  The  niehada,  panchama  and  uhaivata  notes  indi¬ 
cate  evil. 

41.  If  tho  sound  of  the  sky-lark,  the  ram,  the  peacock, 
the  tmvngoose  and  tho  king-fisher  bo  heard  or  if  the  names 
of  these  creatures  bo  heard  mentioned  or  if  the  creatures  he 
seen,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth;  if  the  blood-sucker  be 
seen  in  front  of  a  person  there  will  he  misery. 

42-  If  the  names  of  the  leech,  the  snake,  tho  hare, 
the  hog  or  the  iguana  be  heard  mentioned  prosperity  is 
indicated ;  but  the  sound  and  the  appearance  of  these 
creatures  indicate  evil.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  names 
of  tho  monkey  and  tho  bear  be  heard  mentioned,  evil  is 
indicated,  while  both  the  s  >und  and  the  appearance  of  the 
creatures  indicate  prosperity. 

43.  If  an  odd  number  of  animals,  birds  and  the  mnn- 
goose  be  seen  to  move  from  left  to  right  prosperity  is  indi¬ 
cated  and  according  to  Bhrigu  tho  blue  jay  and  the  tnira- 


,184 


1U.' ill  AT  8AMI11TA 


OB. 


«L 


goose  indicate  good  luckjf  found  to  move  from  right  to  left 
in  the  afternoon. 

44.  Chik'km,  Kutnpuri  and  Pirili  indicate  good  luck 
if  found  to  move  from  loft  to  right  by  day,  and  the  hog,  the 
iguana  and  tho  snake  indicate  good  luck  if  found  to  pass 
Oil  the  right  side. 

45-  The  horse  and  articles  of  white  color  indicate  good 
lock  when  in  the  east;  corpse  and  flesh  indicate  good  luck 
whan  :n  the  south;  Virgins  and  curdled  milk  indicate  good 
luck  when  in  tho  west ;  aod  the  cow,  the  Sadhus  and  the 
Brahmins  indicate  good  l  uck  when  seen  in  the  north. 


4G-  Persons  living  by  the  use  of  the  net  and  by  dogs 
indicate  evil  when  seen  in  the  east.  Those  who  live  by 
weapons  and  by  acts  of  torture  indicate  evil  when  seen  in 
the  south.  Liquor  and  hermaphrodites  indicate  evil  when 
Been  in  the  we.st.  And  wicked  men,  seats  and  ploughs  in¬ 
dicate  evil  when  seen  in  the  north. 


47.  On  auspicious  occasions  and  on  occasions  of  the 
meeting  of  persons,  of  battle,  of  return  journey  and  of  search 
nfter  articles  lost,  the  omens  that  pass  in  tho  reverse  order 
to  that  mentioned  for  Yatra  (journey)  generally  indicate 
good  lack.  We  shall  however  state  the  exceptions,  and  note- 
worthy  points. 

4S  On  the  several  occasions  mentioned  above,  otnena 
connected  with  the  deer,  the  Bara  and  the  monkey  appear¬ 
ing  fly  day  shall  be  treated  {is  in  Yatra  and  omens  connect¬ 
ed  with  the  blue  jay,  the  Vanjula  and  the  flog,  appearing  at 
the  beginning  of  day  shall  also  be  similarly  treated. 

49.  Omens  connected  with  the  Naptrika,  the  owl  and 
the  ichournou  appearing  at  the  end  of  night  shall  be  treated 
in  the  same  way  as  in  Yatra.  In  matters  connected  with 
women,  omens  described  for  men  apply  in  the  reverse  order. 


HRUTAT  SAMEITA 


38 


o 


50.  On  occasions  of  visits  to  the  king,  of  return-journey 
and  of  entry  into  mountains,  woods  and  rivers,  the  omens 
mentioned  for  Tatra  apply. 

51.  Omens  on  the  left  aide  stated  to  be  auspicious  for 
Tatra  are  auspicious  for  other  occasions  if  they  are  found  in 
front;  and  omens  on  the  right  side  stated  to  be  auspicious 
for  Tatra  are  auspicious  for  other  occasions  if  they  are 
found  behind. 

Two  birds  flying  one  on  each  side  of  a  traveller  form 
an  omen  known  as  parigha-  It  is  Ivriyadeepta  in  nature  and 
points  to  the  death  of  the  person  starting  on  a  journey. 

52.  If  these  omens  be  of  gentle  sound  and  of  agreeable 
motion  they  indicate  the  gain  of  wealth  and  are  technically 
known  as  Sakanadwara. 

53.  According  to  some  the  term  Sakuoadwara  is 
applied  to  omens  that  remain  on  the  right  and  left  Bides,  that 
are  of  the  same  genus  and  whose  sound  and  motion  are 
agreeable. 

54.  If  an  omen  bo  favorable  and  another  bo  nnfavora. 
ble  bad  luck  is  indicated  to  the  traveller.  He  shall  bo 
guided  by  the  more  powerful  omen  of  the  two. 


55.  If  a  person  starting  on  a  journey  should  first  note 
an  omen  stated  to  be  auspicious  for  return  journey  and  then 
note  one  stated  to  be  auspicious  for  onward  journey  success 
of  object  is  indicated.  Similarly,  if  a  person  starting  on  a 
return  jonrney  should  first  note  an  omen,  stated  to  be  aus¬ 
picious  for  onward  journey  and  then  note  one  stated  to  bo 
auspicious  for  return  journey,  good,  luck  is  indicated 

56.  If  an  omen  should  first  be  found  to  be  auspicioue 
and  ifthesamo  should  then  stop  the  journey,  the  person 
who  proceeds  nevertheless  will  either  suite*  death  by  his 
enemy  or  will  engage  in  fight  or  suffer  from  disease, 

21 


BMHAT  SAM  HIT  A. 


pet,  30'. 


57.  Deepfca  (malefic)  omens  proceeding  from  left  to 
right  indicate  four ; '  and. if  s licit  omens  appear  at  the  com- 
menoeiient  of  a  work  such  work  will  suffer  in  jury  at  the  end 
of  a  year. 

58.  If  the  lunar  day,  the  wind,  the  sun,  the  Nakshatra 
the  places  and  cheshta  (motion)  be  unfavorable,  wealth, 
army,  strength,  limbs,  friends  and  business  will  suffer  respec¬ 
tively. 

59.  If  the  malefic  omens  occur  when  the  clouds  roar 
there)  will  be 'fear  of  injury  from  strong  winds.  Malelio 
omens  occuiriogUluring  twilight  hours  indicate  injury  from 
weapons. 


60.  If  the  creatures  be  found  in  funeral  piles,  hair  or 
skull  there  will  be  death,  imprisonment  or  suffering  from 
torture  respectively  and  if  the  creatures  be  found  on  thorns, 
wood,  or  ashes  there  will  be  quarrel,  suffering  from  hard 
work  and  grief  respectively. 

61.  If  malefic  omens  be  found  on  objects  hollow  and 
weak  or  ou  stones,  new  fear  or  failure  of  objects  is  indica¬ 
ted  ;  but  if  the  omens  bebonefic  good  luck  is  indicated. 

62.  If  the  creatures  bo  found  to  pass  stool  there  will 

? 

be  failure  of  object  ;  if  they  be  found  to  eat  anything,  there 
will  be  success  of  object.  Again,  if  a  creature  bo  seen  to 
move  away  crying  from  a  person,  it  indicates  good  luck  to 
the  traveller;  but  if  it  be  found  coming  towards  him,  it  in¬ 
dicates  that  the  person  might  return*  from  his  journy. 

03.  If  the  sound  of  the  creature  be  found  to  be  bad, 
there  will  be  quarrel ;  if  the  place  occupied  by  the  creature 
be  bad,  there  will  bo  light.  If  the  cry  of  the  creature  be 
loud  at  the  beginning  and  weak  at  the  end  there  will  be 
theft  of  property. 

64.  If  the  omen  bo  bad  and  found  to  remain  crying 
in  the  same  place,  the  village  iu  the  neighbourhood  will, 
meet  with  ruin  after  seven  days,  and  tho  chief  town,  the 


.  39.] 


BRIHAt  SAME  IT  A 


country  and  the  king  will  also  moot  with  ruin  alter  a  month., 
six  mouths,  and  one  year  respectively. 

Go.  If  the  creatures  be  those  that  eat  the  flesh  of 
thoiv  own  kind,  other  than  snakes,  rats,  cats,  and  fish, 
there  will  be  misery. 

C6.  Except  in  the  case  of  an  ass  and  a  mar.  for  tbo 
generation  of  a  male  and  the  case  of  a  man  and  a  woman 
of  different  castes  joining  in  sexual  union,  if  a  creature  of 
one  spec ieft  be  found  to  copulate  with  a  creature  of  another 

species  the  country  will  meet  with  ruin. 

07.  If  the  creature  be  found  to  pass  near  the  feet, 
■breast  or  head  of  a  person  there  will  respectively  bo  im¬ 
prisonment,  torture  and  fear ,  if  it  be  found  to  drink  water 
there  will  bo  immediate  rain ;  if  it  be  found  to  eat  grass 
there  will  betheft  of  property  ;  if  it  be  found  to  eat  he:  h 
the  person  will  got  wounded,  and  it  it  be  found  to  eat  .ico 

there  will  also  be  imprisonment. 

6S.  If  the  creature  be  seen  in  any  of  the  eigh  quar¬ 
ters  beginning  from  thoDeepta  (malefic)  qua  ter  and  going 
round,  there  will  respectively  bo  a  meeting  with  offenders, 
wicked  men,  ministers,  kings,  preachers  of  Parana*?,  old 
moo,  cruel  men  and  violent  men. 

GO.  If  the  omen  he  the  approach  of  an  object  with 
excellent  fruits  ai  d  the  like  there  will  be.  gain  oi'  wealth 
and  strength-  If  the  same  object  bo  found  bright,  mi!  1 
and  with  the  eyes  turned  to  the  ground,  the  person  will  d 
wicked  deeds. 


0 


70.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  an  inauspicious  crea¬ 
tor  e,  in  one  of  -the  corners  (S.  E,  S.  vV,  K-  E,  Is.  \\ ,)  reek 
prooated  by  the  cry  of  a  creature  on  the  left  side  of  a  per¬ 
son  there  will  bo  intimacy  with  a  woman  of  the  class 
belonging  to  such  corner- 

71.  If  the  omen  bo  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  a  Santa 
(beneftc)  quarter  reciprocated  by  the  cry  of  a  creator 


BJ.IIHA.T  a  AM  HIT  A 


BiUHA.T  SAM  HIT  A  C’H.  39.] 

the  Deepfca  (5th  malefic)  quarter,  there  will  be  success  in 
fight  and  a  meeting  with  persons  belonging  to  the  Santa 
quarter.  If  the  reverse  bo  the  case  there  will  bo  misery. 

72.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  before  a  per¬ 
son,  reciprocated  by  the  cry  of  a  creature  on  his  left  there 
will  be  fear  of  troubles  from  kinsmen ;  but  if  the  cry  of 
such  creature  be  reciprocated  by  the  cry  of  a  creature  on 
fche  right  side  there  wiii  be  fear  of  troubles  from  the  per¬ 
son’s  enemies ;  and  if  all  the  three  creatures  be  heard  to  cry 
together  there  will  be  death. 

7<h  Aa  omen  occurring  on  the  top  of  a  tree  indicates 
th©  arrival  of  an  elephant ;  if  it  occur  in  the  middle  of  a 
tree,  the  arrival  of  a  horse  is  indicated,  and  if  in  the  foot  of 
a  tree  the  arrival  of  a  chariot  is  indicated  ;  if  the  omen 
occur  in  a  long  object,  the  arrival  of  human  bearers  is  in¬ 
dicated;  if  in  one  of  the  productions  of  water,  the  arrival  of 
a  boat  is  indicated ,  and  if  the  omen  occur  on  a  headless  ob¬ 
ject,  the  arrival  of  a  palanquin  is  indicated. 

7-1.  An  omen  occurring  in  waggons,  in  high  places, 
and  in  shadows,  iudicate  tho  gain  of  an  umbrella.  Omens 
occurring  in  the  east  and  S-  east,  in  tho  south  and  S.  west, 
in  the  west  and  north-west  and  in  the  north  and  north-east 
take  effect  after  a  day,  three  days,  five  days,  and  seven  days 
respectively. 


75.  Tho  lords  of  the  eight  quarters  beginning  from 
the  oast  are  respectively  Indra,  Agni  (fire),  Yama  (god  of 
death),  Niruti,  Vanina  (god  of  rain),  Vayu  (the  wind), 
Soma  (the  Moon)  and  Eesami  (Siva).  The  four  prime  quar¬ 
ters  (E.  S,  W,  N.)  are  masoulino  and  the  four  sub-quartets 
(S,  E.  S.  W,  N.  E)  are  feminine. 

76-  Omens  occurring  in  the  eight  quarters  beginning 
from  the  east  refer  to  wood  in  genera],  the  palm,  split 
bamboo,  clotb,  productions  of  water,  arrows,  leather,  and 
shawls,  and  to  letters  of  advice  regarding  them-  Omens 


Blit  HAT  SAMHITA 


40] 


occurring  fn  any  of  the  thirty-two  points  of  the  horizon  in¬ 
dicate  dealing  or  business  with  the  persons  referring  to  them. 

77-  Effects  of  omens  appearing  in  the  eight  quarters 
beginning  from  the  east  will  occur  respectively  in  pi  ice  of 
physical  exercise,  fire,  indistinct  Round,  quarrel,  water, 
fetters,  mantras  and  cows.  The  four  prime  quarters — E.  S. 
W.  &  N.— are  respectively  red,  yellow,  black  and  white,  and 
he  color  of  a  sub-quarter  is  a  mixture  of  the  colors  of  the 
two  adjacent  prime  quarters. 

78.  Omens  appearing  in  the  eight  quarters  beginning 
from  the  east,  take  effect  respectively  in  caves,  water,  hill, 
places  of  sacrifice  and  the  abodes  of  shepherds  ;  these  are 
also  places  of  meeting,  fear,  loss  and  the  like  referred  to  in 
connection  with  several  quarters. 

7 (J.  When  the  question  refers  to  women,  omens  ap¬ 
pearing  in  the  several  quarters  beginning  from  the  East 
point  to  women  who  arc  big,  young,  of  defective  organs, 
dirty,  dressed  in  black  cloth,  mean,  5. tail,  and  widowed  res¬ 
pectively. 


80.  The  four  prime  quarters  beginning  from  the  East 
refer  to  silver,  gold,  sick  patients  and  to  women  and  also  to 
sheep,  carriage,  sacrificial  rite  and  cow-shed.  The  eight 
quarters  beginning  from  the  east  refer  to  the  banyan  tree, 
the  reditree,  the  Rodina,  the  bamboo,  the  mango,  the  Kha- 
dira,  the  Bilva  and  the  Arjuna  trees  respectively. 


CHAPTER  XTj  (87). 

Section  II. 

ON  Antara  Chakra  or  the  circle  of  Hokiaon- 
1.  If  the  orm  n  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  eastern 
quarter  (a)  when  such  quarter  is  benefic  there  will  be  a  meet¬ 
ing  with  art  officer  of  the  king  and  the  gain  of  presents, 
precious  gems,  wealth  and  excellent  articles. 


(a)  Of  33  points  iuto  w'aioh  the  cwcle  cf  liomou  is  divided.  VKk  last 
chsiptcr. 


90  KRIIfAT  SAMHJTA  C'H.  40.] 

2.  If  tli©  omen  bo  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  next 
(2nd)  benefic  quarter  there  will  be  gain  of  gold  and  of  a 
desired,  object.  And  if  in  the  3rd  beneiic  quarter  there  •will 
be  gain  of  weapons,  of  wealth  and  of  arecaimt. 

3.  If  the  omen  be  th©  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  4th  be* 
nefic  quarter  there  will  be  meeting  with  a  person  of  the 
fcwkio  born  class  and  with  a  Brahmin  who  performs  the  lire 
ceremony  of  Agnihotra,  and  if  in  the  5th  benefic  quarter 
(S.  Bi)  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  a  servant  or  an  ascetic 
and  a  gain  of  gold  and  metals. 

4.  (f  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  6th  bo- 
nefic  quarter  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  a  prince  and  the 
gain  of  a  desired  object,  and  if  in  the  7th  quarter  there  will 
be  the  gain  of  a  woman,  of  virtue,  of  mustard  seeds,  and 
barley  grain. 

5.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  8th  bene¬ 
fit  quarter,  there  will  be  recovery  of  property  lost  aud  the 
gain  of  an  object;  of  desire  by  a  traveller. 

(j.  If  the  omen  bo  the  cry  of  a  or.  a*; ure  in  the  ltd  be- 
ueSc  quarter  (S),  a  person  will  successfully  perform  his 
journey  and  there  will  also  be  the  gain  of’peacocks,  buffaloes 
and  pigeons.  If  in  the  lOfch  benefic  quarter,  there  will  bo 
a  meeting  with  musicians  as  well  as  prosperity  and  joy. 

7.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  ot  a  creature  in  the  1.1th 
benefic  quarter,  there  will  be  meeting  with  fishermen  and 
gain  of  fish,  of  partridge  and  the  like,  and  if  in  the  12fch  be- 
nefic  quarter  there  will  be  meeting  with  au  ascetic  and  the 
gain  of  good  meeds  and  fruits. 

8.  If  the  omou  bo  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  I3th 
benefic  quarter  (3,  W*)  there  will  be  a  gain  of  women  and 
the  arrival  of  a  horse,  ornaments,  a  messenger  and  a  news 
letter;  and  if  in  the  14th  benefic  quarter,  there  will  be  a 
meeting  with  leather  work-men  and  the  gain  of  an  article 
made  of  leather. 


{).  If  the’’  omen  bo  the  cvy  of  a  creature  in  the  1 5 tit 
benefic  qnnrtor,  the  names  of  monkeys  and  ascetics  will  bo 
beard  mentioned  or  t  here  will  be  a  meeting  with  these ;  ami 
if  the  16th  benefic  quarter,  there  will  bo  a  gain  of  fruits, 
flowers  and  of  articles“of  ivory. 

10.  If  the  omen  be  tflo  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  I  Vtli 
•  benefic  quarter  (W)  there  will  be  a  gain  of  tbo  gums  of^  tbo 
sea,  of  Vydurya,  and  of  articles  set.  with  gems;  and  if  m 
the  18fch  benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  bill- 
men,  hunters  and  thieves  and  the  gain  of  meals 

IK  If  tbo  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  lOtb 
benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  persons  afflict¬ 
ed  with  windy  complaints  and  there  will  also' be  a  gain  of 
sandal  wood  arid  of  agaru ;» and  if  in  the  2K.h  benefto 
quarter  there  will  bo  a  gain  of  weapons  and  books  as  well  as 
a  meeting  with  persons  dealing  m  them. 

12.  If  tho  omen  be  t-lie  cry  of  a  creature-  in  the  21st- 
benefic  quarter  (N,  W  )  there  will  be  a  gain  of  the  bone  of 
the  white  cuttle  fish,  of  'chamara,  and  of  woollen  sh;  wls,  and 
there  will  also'be  a  meeting  with  a  person  of  the  Kayaetba  (a) 
Caste  or  with  a  scribe;  and  if  in  the  22ud  benefic  quarter 
there  will  bo  a  gain  of  earthen  ware  and  a  meeting  With 
conjurers  and  Piudibb audas . 

13.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  23rd 
benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  friends  anu  the 
gain  of  wealth  ;  and  if  in  the  24th  benefic  quarter  there  will 
be. a  gain  of  cloths  and  horse  and  a  meeting  with  a  close 

friend. 

34.  If  the  otneu  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  25th 
benefic  quarter  (,N)  there  will  be  a  gain  of  curdled  milk,  i  »ce 
and  fried  grain  and  a  meeting  with  Brahmins  ;  and  u  in^° 

(a).  A  pertou  bvru  o£  a  Kahfttriy*  InVsiesjuxd  a  Such  a  Kiotber. 


2(!fc‘h  benefle  quarter  there  will  bo  a  gain  of  wealth  and  a 
meeting  with  the  chief  of  a  party  of  men,* 


15.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  In  the  27th 
bonefic  quarter  there  will  be  a  meeting'  with  a  prostitute, 
n,  Brahma  chari  and  a  servant  and  there  will  also  be  the 
gain  nf  dried  fruits  and  flowers  ;  and  if  in  the  28th  benefio 
quarter,  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  a  painter  and  a  gain 
of  cloths. 

lfj.  If  the  omen  be  tbo  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  29th 
boneftc  quarter  (N.  E)  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  an  idol- 
worshipper  and  a  gain  of  grain,  gems  and  cows  ;  and  if  in 
the  30th  benefic  quarter  there  will  bo  a  gain  of  cloth  and  a 
meeting  with  a  prostitute. 

17.  If  the  omen  be.  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  31st 
benefic  quarter  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  a  washerman 
and  the  gain  of  the  productions  of  water ;  and  if  in  th0 
32nd  heretic  quarter  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  an  ele¬ 
phant- driver  and  the  gain  of  wealth  and  elephants. 

18.  The  division  of  the  circle  of  horizon  into  32  equal 
parts  was  also  mentioned  in  connection  with  house-building. 
The  eight  spokes  (radii)  and  the  centre  form 'nine  more 
places  where  omens  indicate  various  effects. 

19.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  iu  the  centre 
there  will  be  a  meeting  with  kinsmen  and  friends  and  soxual 
union  with  an  excellent  woman;  if  it  be  the  cry ’of  a  crea¬ 
ture  in  the  eastern  spoke,  there  will  bo  a  meeting  with  a. 
king  and  the  gain  of  rod  silk  cloths. 

20.  If  the  oineti  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  S-  E, 
spoke,  there  will  bo  a  meeting]  with  a  weaver,  a  carpenter 
a  sculptor  and  a  horse  driver  and  there  will  also*be  a  gain 
of  vrenUb  through  thorn  or  the  gain  of  horses, 

21.  If  the  omen  bo  the  cry  of  a  creator©  in  the 
'southern  spoke,  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  virtuous  per¬ 
sons  and  the  gain  of  virtue. 


BRlfiAT  SAJUHITA 


m 


22.  If  tho  omen  be  the  cty  of  a  creature  in  the 
south-western  spoke,  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  a  cow, 
a  player  and  a  Kapalika,  and  there  will  also  be  tho;  gain  of 
a  bull,  black  gram,  horse- gram  and  tha  like  and  meals. 

23.  If  th o  onion  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  tho  west¬ 
ern  spoko,  there  will  bo  a  meeting  with  husbandmen  and 
the  gain  of  the  productions  of  the  sec,  of  crystal,  of  fruits 
and  of  liquor. 

24.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  lie  north¬ 
western  spoke,  there  will  be  a  meeting  with  a  porter,  a  car¬ 
penter,  and  an  ascetic  and  there  will  also  be  the  gain,  of  the 
flowers  of  the  Tilaka,  the  piper-betel  and  of  tho  Pannaga. 

25.  If  tho  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  north¬ 
ern  spoke,  there  will,  be  gain  of  wealth  and  there  Will  also 
be  a.  meeting  with  a  devout  person  and  with  a  person  dress¬ 
ed  in  yellow  robes. 

20.  If  the  omen  be  the  cvy  of  a  creature  in  the  north¬ 
eastern  spoke,  there  will  be  a.  meeting  with  a  female  devotee 


and  the  gain  of  iron,  blothT  alrd  buUs. 


27.  Omens  occurring  inNthe  eight  quarters  on  the 

Soiilh,  in  the  2nd,  Oth,  3rd,  7th/'*qd  8th  quarters,  on  tho 
West  and  in  t  he  2nd  quarter  on  the  Nbith  are  not  favorable 
for  journey.  Omens  occurring  in  tho  other  quarters  are 
auspicious  for  tho  purpose-  \ 

28.  Inside  the  circle,  omens  appearing  the  south¬ 
western  and  north  "Western  spokes  arc  not  favorable  or 
journey.)'  and  those  appearing  iu  the  other  spokes  and  in  tho 
centre  are  auspicious  for  the  purpose. 


29.  We  have  till  now  been  describing  the  effects  of 
omens  in  the  several  quarters  when  they  happen  to  be  be  co¬ 


lic, -md  we  shall  now  proceed  to  describe  the  effects  of  omens 
in  the  same  quarters  when  the)  are  malefic.  If  tho  omen 


25 


( 

. — •  [on.  4o: 


RRIEAT  SAMHITA 


Hast,-  there  will  be  fear  from  the  king  and  a- meet¬ 
ing  with  the  enemy. 

30.  If  the  omen  occiir  in  the  2nd  malefic  quarter 
there  will  ho  injury  to  gold  and  suffering  to  goldsmiths  ;  if 
in  the  3i$  £roate£b  quarter  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth, 
quarrel  and  fight. 

81.  If  the  ©men  occur  in  the  4tb  malefic  quarter  there 
will  be  fear  of  injury  from  firsj  if  it  occur  due  S  K,  there 
■will  be  foar  from  robbers,  and  if  in  the  6th  malefic  quarter 
there  will  he  loss  of  wealth  and  the  death  of  princes* 

33,  If  the  omen  he  the  cvy  of  &  creature  in  tlio  7th 
malefic  quarter,  there  will  he  miscarriage  of  pregnancy,  and 
id!  in  the  8th  malefic  quarter  there  wilt  be  the  death  of 
dealers  iu  gold  and  of  sculptors  as  well  aa  fight. 

S3.  If  the  omen  bo  the  cry  of  a  creature  due  South, 
there  will  bo  fear  from  the  king  and  death  by  plague;  if 
in  tho  lObh  malefic  quarter,  the  Bombas  (wandering  tribe) 
will  suffer  miseries.  '  |  ’ ,  •  .  V  ■  $ 


84.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  U  th 
malefic  quarter,  fishermen  and  fowlers  will  suffer,  and  if  in 
tho  12th  malefic  quarter,  there  will  be  injury  to  meals  and 
ascetics  will  suffer. 


85.  If  tho  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  due  south¬ 
west,  there  will  be  quarrel,  bloodshed  and  fight,  and  if  in 
the  1:4th  malefic  quarter,  there  will  be  injury  to  articles  of 
leather  and  workmen  in  leather  will  suffer  miseries. 


36,  If  the  omen  be  tho  Cry  of  a  creature  in  tho  15th 
malefic  quarter,  ascetics  will  suffer  miseries  and  the  sense  of 
hearing  will  suffer  injury;  if  in  the  16th  malefic  quarter, 
there  will  be  suffering  from  hanger;  if  due  west,  there  will 
1)0  suffering  from  heavy  rains  and  if  in  the  18th  malefic 
quarter,  dogs  and  thieves  will  suffer  miseries. 


BB1KAT  SAMHITA. 


H) 


,<SL 


3 7.  It  tlio  omon  be  the  cry  of  a  creators  in  the  19th 
fOaleiie  quarter  there  will  be  injury  from  violent  winds  ;  if 
in  the  20  th  malefic  quarter^  dealers  in  books  and  weapons 
Will  suffer  ;  if  due  north-west,  books  will  suffer  injuries  and 
if  iu  the  next  (22 ad)  malefic  quarter  there  will  bo  fear  from 
poison,  thieves  and  wind. 

38.  If  the  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  iu  the  23rd 
malefic  quarter,  there  will  be  destruction  of  wealth  and  a 
quarrel  with  friends  ;  if  in  the  24th  malefic  quarter,  horses 
will  be  killed -and  priests  will  suffer. 

39.  If  tha  omen  occur  due  North,  there  will  be  ttieft 
of  cows  and  blows  from  weapons ;  if  •'  .1  the  2d  oh  malefic 
quarter,  parties  of  men  will  suffer  and  there  will  be  des¬ 
truction  of  wealth ;  if  in  the  27th  malefic  quarter,  there 
will  bo  fear  of  injury  from  dogs  and  out-castes,  servants 
and  prostitutes  will  suffer  miseries. 

40.  If  tho  omen  be  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  28th 
jcbalefic  quarter,  cloths  of  various  colors  will  softer  as  well 
as  painters ;  if  it  occur  due  north-east,  there  will  bo  fear  of 
injury  from  fire  and  virtuous  women,  will  suffer  from 
calumny 

41.  If  the  omen  bo  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  next 
(30th)  malefic  quarter  there  will  be  grief  and  the  death  of 
women  j  if  in  the  31st  malefic  quarter,  washermen  and 
persons  dwelling  on  tho  banks  of  rivers  will  suffer  miseries. 

42.  If  the  omen  be  (the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  last 
(32nd)  malefic  quarter,  elephant-drivers  will  suffer  miseries 
as  well  as  elephants.  Again,  if  the  omen  occur  in  the 
eastern  malefic  spoke  (within  the  circle)  a  person  will  lose 
his  wife. 


43.  If  the  omen  occur  in  tho  south-eastern  raalofie 
spoke,  there  will  be  fight  and  injury  from  fire  and  tho 
death  of  horses,  an -j  sculptors  will  suffer.  If  it  occur  in  the 


southern  malefic  spoke,  there  will  bo  destruction  of  works, 
of  charity,  and  if  in  the  south-western  malefic  spoke,  there 
will  be  fear  of  injury  from  fire  and  parties  of  men  will  bo 
killed* 

44.  If  the  omen  bo  the  cry  of  a  creature  in  the  west¬ 
ern  malefic  spoke,  servants  will  suffer  ;  if  in  the  north, 
western  malefic  spoke,  asses  and  camels  will  be  killed  and 
mankind  will  suffer  from  cholera  and  poison. 

4  >-  If  the  omen  occur  in  the  northern  malefic  spoke, 
there  will  be  destruction  of  wealth  ;  and  if  m  the  north¬ 
eastern  malefic  spoke,  the  creatures  of  the  village  and 
shepherds  will  suffer,  and  if  it  occur  in  the  malefic  centre, 
the  person  himself  will  suffer  troubles. 

i  - :  ■  in'' 

CHAPTER  XLI.  (88). 

On  Ominous  Cries . 

1.  The  Kokila  or  the  Indian  Cuckoo,  the  hog’,  the 
)SasaghEa,tbeVai)jii]a,tlie  peacock,  the  fereekn  in  a/the  Brah- 
rnani  (luck,  tho  blue-jay,  tho  Andiraka,  the  wag-tail,  the 
parrot,  the  crow,  the  dove,  the  sky-lark,  the  wild-cock,  tho 
the  osprey,  the  Haritaki  pigeon  tho  vulture,  the  monkey, 
tie  Phonta,  the  cock,  the  Poornakoota  and  the  sparrow  are 
day  birds  and  animals. 

2.  The  Jackal," tlie  Pingala,  the  Chippika,  the  flying 
fox,  the  owl  and  the  hare  are  night  birds  and  animals.  If 
tho  day  birds  be  found  to  move  at  night  or  if  tho  night 
birds  bo  found  to  move  by  day,  either  the  country  will 
suffer  or  the  Icing  will  meet  with  ruin. 

3.  Horses,  men,  serpents,  camels,  leopards,  lions, 
bears,  iguanas,  wolves,  the  muogoose,  the  deer,  the  dog-,  the 
goat,  the  cow,  the  tiger,  the  swan,  the  spotted  antelope, 


41.] 


BBItfA'r  3AMBITA 


197 


the  Stag,  fhe  jaQkal,  the  hodge-hog,  the  cuckoo*  the  cat,  the 
Indian  crane  and  the  pigeon  are  both  day  and  night  animals. 

4  Tho  Bhasha,  the  Kootapura,  the  Karabaka  and  the 
Klarayika  are  birds  of  tho  species  known  as  Poornakoota. 
Tho  Pingalika,  the  Pechlka  and  the  llakka  are  owl  a  of  the 
species  known  as  Ulukacheti. 

5.  The  Kapotaki  and  the  Syatna  are  doyos  of  tho 
same  class.  The  Vanjulaka  and  the  Khadiraebanolm  are 
fowls  of  the  sivuo  class.  The  Ohachlmndari  and  the  Nripa- 
suta  are  rats  of  the  sumo  class.  The  Baleya  and  the 
Qardhabha  arc  asses  of  the  same  class. 

6.  Srotobheri,  Tatakabheri  and  Ekaputraka  are  birds 
0f  the  sa me  class.  The  E&laht ikavika,  and  the  Hair,  are  also 
birds  of  the  game  class.  The  Knla  is  a  bird  two  inches  high 
and  Bounds  like  a  Bhringara  (a  golden  pitcher?)  at  night. 

7.  The  Burbalaka  and  the  Bhandika  are  birds  of  one 
species.  If  those  birds  be  found  to  pass  on  the  right  side, 
they  indicate  good  lack  to  the  people  of  the  Eastern, 
countries.  Chikkara  is  a  species  of  animal  and  Krakavaku 
and  Kukuta  are  fowls  of  the  same  species’ 

8.  Girtakukuta  is  also  known  as  Kuialakukuta  and 
Kudyamatsya  (tho  wall-fish)  and  Grahagodhika  ai*c  different 
names  for  the  house  lizard. 

9.  Divya  and  Dhanvana  aro  animals  of  the  samo 
species;  Kroda  and  Snkara  aro  different  names  for  tho  hog  ; 
Go  and  TJsra  are  different  names  for  the  cow  and  Swa  and 
Sarameya  are  dogs  of  the  same  species. 

10-  Thus  birds  and  animals  bear  different-  names  in 
different  countries.  The  animals  shall  first  be  identified 
from  their  names  and  their  cries  shall  then  bo  interpreted 
as  stated  below. 

11.  If  the  Yanjula  bird  be  heard  to  sound  as  ' Vittul , 
such  sound  is  inauspicious  \  but  if  it  be  heard  to  sound  as 


JUtfllAT  SAimiTA  [CH,  .41. 

is  auspicious.  The  other  than  natural 
«oni)ds  of.  the  hawk,  the  parrot,  the  vulture  and  the  crow 
are  inauspicious. 

12.  If  the  dove  be  seen  to  conceal  itself  in  a  carriage 
or  a  seat  or  a  bed  or  enter  a  lotus  flower,  it  indicates  evil. 
•The  effects  are  felt  after  different  periods  in  the  case  of 
different  species  of  this  bird  :  — « 

13  If  the  dove  be  wholly  white,  the  effects  will  be 
felt  after  a  year3  if  it  bo  of  various  colors,  the  effects  will  be 
felt  after  <5  months  and  if  of  crimson  color  with  a  slight  ad¬ 
mixture  of  black,  the  effects  will  be  felt  that  same  day- 

14.  If  the  cuckoo  be  heard  to  sound  as  chic  bit,  it  indi¬ 
cates  good  luck;  if  as  mlimlj  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth  { 
if  as  Ghachhctr,  it  indicates  evil  and  if  as  thikcMk  there  will 
be  gain  of  a  desired  object. 

15.  If  the  JJaritala  -pigeon  be  heard  to  sound  as  g%gu 
there  will  bo  prosperity  ;  if  in  any  other  way,  it  indicates  evil. 
The  sound  of  the  sky-lark  always  indicates  prosperity. 

1(1.  If  the  female  crane  be  heard  to  sound  as  klsh-lush 
or  as  haha-haha  there  will  bo  prosperity  5  but  if  the  sound 
bo  icano-kara,  there  will  also  be  prosperity  but  without  gam 
of  wealth* 

17.  If  the  same  bird  be  heard  to  sound  as  kutiu-di^ 
there  will  be  prosperity  >  if  as  IvcUuklh  thero  Will  bo  rain  j 
but  if  the  sound  of  the  bird  han^bHikU  or  as  yum  there 
will  be  evil. 

18.  If  the  Divyaka  be  seen  on  the  left  side,  there  will 
be  prosperity.  If  it  be  seen  a  cubit  above  the  ground  thero 
will  be  gain  of  a  desired  object  and  if  it  bo  seen  above  the 
height  of  ft  man,  the  person  will  become  master  of  the 
wholo  country  surrounded  by  the  sea. 

19.  If  the  cobra  he  seen  to  move  towards  a  traveller 
there  will  be  a  meeting  with  tho  enemy,  imprisonment. 


BRIHAT  SAUIRTPA- 

slaughter  and  rniiV  j  if  ifc  bo  seen  to  move  on  the  left  side, 
there  will  be  failure  of  a  work  attempted  but  safe  journey 
to  and  fro. 

20.  If  tii©  wag  tail  be  seen  on  a  lotus  or  on  the  heads  of 
horses,  elephants  or  snakes  there  will  be  gain  of  a  kingdom  ; 
if  seen  in  pate  places  and  on  meadows,  there  will  be  pros¬ 
perity  and  if  seen  on  ashes  bones,  wood,  husk,  hair  or 
grass,  there  will  be  grief  for  a  year. 

21.  If  the  fcanooli  ie  partridge  be  heard  to  sound  Jcil  '- 
hilkiU  there  will  bo  prosperity  and  hot  otherwise ;  if  at 
night  the  hare  be  seen  to  go  crying  on  the  left  side  there 
will  he  good  luck. 

22.  If  the  monkey  bo  heard  to  cry  m  kilihili  tho 
traveller  will  not  meet  with  success.  According  to  some, 
if  the  wild  cock  be  heard  to  cry  as  chuglu  or  like  a  monkey 
tho  traveller  will  meet  with  success. 

23.  If  tlio  blue-jay  be  seen  to  move  to  the  right  of  a 
person  with  worms,  insects  or  bone  in  its  mouth  or  to  fly 
round  in  the  sky,  the  traveller  will  icon  gain  Wealth. 

24.  If  tho  crow  and  the  bluo-jay  be  soon  to  pass  to 
the  right  fighting,  the  jay  suffering  defeat,  the  traveller  will 
be  killed  and  if  the  reverse  be  the  case,  thero  will  be  suc¬ 
cess. 

25.  If  the  blue-jay  be  heard  to  sound  as  keka  like  tho 
Poornakuta  on  the  left  side,  there  will  be  success  5  but  if 
hrethret  be  the  cry,  it  indicates  evil ;  but  the  appearance  of 
the  blue-jay  always  indicates  success  to  the  traveller. 

2fi.  If  the  (Indira  bo  heard  to  sound  a  &  tee ,  it  indicates 
good  luck  and  if  tho  cry  be  tiitiilcc,  it  indicates  evil.  If  tho 
phenta  be  seen  on  the  right  side,  it  indicates  good  luck. 
The  sound  of  this  bird  signifies  neither  good  nor  evil. 

27.  If  the  Sreekarna  bo  heard  to  sound  as  qu&quti  on 
the  left  side,  it  indicates  good  luck  j  but  if  the  cry  be  c,h>k- 


0  BUIHA1  SAMHITA.  [CH-  41 

■ . "  • .  r\  1 1 '  *  >  ,  J  if  i,  '  I’  '  ,  ^  ’ 

cMh  the  offsets  will  be  iiidififeroufc;  if  otherwise,  the  sound 
aiguilles  nothing. 

28.  If  the  DurbaH  be  heard  to  Sound  as  cJunl-r/trilv 
on  the  loft  side,  there  will  bo  the  gain  of  a  desired  object 
and  if  it  bo  seen  to  move  from  left  to  right,  there  will  be 
immediate  success  of  work, 

29.  If  the  Durbali  he  seen  to  move  from  left  to  right 
crying  cliih-cMlti  there  will,  be  prosperity  but  not  success  of 
work  ;  if  it  be  soon,  to  pass  from  right  to  ie!r,  there  will  be 
slaughter,  imprisonment  and  fear. 

30.  If  the  Sarika  be  heard  to  sound  Kralcta  or  fear¬ 
lessly  as  trey-t'rcy,  the  traveller  will  soon  get  wounded  and 
there  will  be  much  shedding  of  blood. 

31.  If  the  Phentaka  be  heard  to  cry  as  ehiril-virilv  on 
the  loft  side,  there  will  bo  prosperity ;  if  tho  sound  bo 
otherwise  there  will  be  evil. 

32.  If  the  cry  of  the  ass  be  long  and  on  the  left  side, 
it  indicates  good  luck.  If  the  sound  be  Otn,  a  person  proceed¬ 
ing  on  a  journey  will  meet  with  success  ;  otherwise,  tfc.o  cry 
is  malefic. 

83.  If  stag  and  the  door  be  heard  to  sound  as  Aam& 
if  the  spotted  antelope  be  beard  to  sound  as  0  there  will 
be  good  luck;  if  otherwise  there  will  be  misery. 

34*  The  cock  crows  as  Kuku  except  when  it  sounds 
fearfully  at  night  and  also  when  ill  tlH  long  natural  and 
high  sound  heard  in  the  morning  indicates  prosperity  to 
the  country,  the  town  and  the  king. 

35.  The  Cbippika  sounds  in  various  ways.  The  Kulu- 
Jnilu  sound  is  auspicious?  other  sounds  aro  inauspicious. 
The  sound  of  tho  cat  is  always  auspicious  to  a  traveller  ; 
if  the  cow  be  seen  to  sneeze,  it  indicates  tho  death  of  the 
person  proceeding  on  a  journey. 


S6-  The  owl  is  often  seen  flying  after  its  mate  setting 
up  the  joyous  cry  of  humhumov  gugluk •  The  sound  la  benefits' 
If:  fclio  sound  be  "gwrulw  or  leisiim.  it  is  always  malefic.  If 
the  owl  be  seen  to  sound  frequently  ns  boJabcila,  there  will 
be  quarrel  <  but  if  the  sound  be  tatattata,,  there  will  be  ipfee^y 
j4.11  other  sounds  are  malefic  and  do  not  indicate  good  luck, 

37.  If  the  crane  with  its  mate  be  heard  to  sound  to 
gefcher,  it  indicates  good  luck-  But  if  one  o!:  them  bo  heard 
to  sound  alone  or  if  they  be  heard  to  sound'  one  after  the 
other,  such  sound  is  not  auspicious. 

88.  If  tho  Pingala  bo  beard  to  sound  as  chintvinlv 
good  luck  is  indicated.  Any  other  sound  is  'inauspicious. 

3D,  If  the  P ingala  he  heard  to  sound  as  l'see  it  stops 
the  journey.  If  it  ba  heard  to  sound  as  husvJcusu,  there  will 
be  quarrel.  1  shall  now  state  what  has  to  be  dope  to  make 
this  bird  foretell  future  events., 

40.  Tho  tree  in  which  the  bird  Pingala  may  happen 
to  dwell  shall  be  visited  by  a  person  who  has, bathed  either 
in  the  evening  or  in  the  twilight  hours ;  the  person  shall 
first  worship  Brahma  aud  the  other  Devas-  Ho  shall  then 
adorn  the  tree  with  a  fine  new  cloth  and  with  Sandal  paste 

41  At  mid-night  the  person  shall  take  his  station 
alone  to  tho  north-east  of  the  tree  and  pronouncing  tho 
mantras  given  below  within  its  bearing  call  upon  tho  bird 
to  divine  his  thoughts  and  indicate  tho  issue  he  shall 
solemnly  call  upon  the  bird  to  do  so  in  the  name  of  every 
thing  holy  excepting'  the  names  of  the  Devas. 

42.  u  0  thou  giver  of  prosperity,  I  entreat  tlu  o  to 
divine  my  thoughts;  thou  art  praised  as  knowing  all  langua¬ 
ges.” 

43.  <(  I  mean  to  leave  only  after  being  informed  by 
thee  and  I  will  question  thee  from  the  noth -eastern  corner 
earlv  in  the  morning  ” 

"  20 


(■WW 


cm,  42. 'i 


<t  O  thou  giver  of  prosperity,  I  tail  upon  thee  to 
indicate  by  signs?  the  issue  of  the  object  1  have  in  view,'* 
45.  If  immediately  after  this,  the  bird  bo  heard  to 
Bound  the  ckiril-virilv  there  will  be  success  of  the  under¬ 
taking,  but  if  the  sound  be  either  die  or  kwfatJcucka  there 
■jv ill  be  much  mental  sfFemig, 

49.  If  the  bird  be  mute, thou  also,  there  will  be  success* 


10  effects  described  for  the  numerous  points  of  the  Circle 
of  Horizon  apply  hero  also;  and  if  the  bird  bo  seated  in  the 
top-fhost  branches,  the  effects  will  fully  cotno  to  pass  5  it  in 
the  middle  branches,  one-half  of  the  effects  will  alone  come 
to  pass?  and  if  in  the  lower  branches  very  little  of  the  effects 
will  come  to  pass. 

47.  AH  that  has  been  said  for  the  thirty -two  points  of 
the  outer-circle,  the  eight  spoke  lines  and  the  centre  apply 
to  the  sound  of  the  house-lizard  in  these  positions.  Again, 
if  the  blind  mouse  bo  heard  to  sound  as  chicchid,  the  sound 
is  malefic,  but  if  the  sound  be  titt’d  it  is  beuefic  and  indicates 
good  luck, 

CHAPTER  XL II  (89). 

TV. 

On  Omens  connected  with  the  Hog. 

3.  (a).  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  pass  urine  on  a  man,  a 
horse,  an  elephant,  a  pot,  a  saddle,  on  milk  trees,  on  heapa 
of  uoburnt  brick,  on  an  umbrella,  a  bed,  a  seat,  a  wooden 
r  or  tar,  on  a  banner,  a  chatuara  or  ground  covered  with 
vender  grass  or  flowers  and.  to  go  before  the  traveller,  it 
indicates  success;  if  it  be  seen  to  pass  urine  on  wet  cow-dung, 
the  person  will  got  good  meals,  and  if  on  dry  cow-dung  he 
■will  get  miserable  meals  or  sugar  and  cakes. 

( h )  Agin,  if  the  dog  bo  seen  to  pass  urine  on  poisonous 
trees,  on  thorny  trees,  dry -wood,  stones,  dried  trees,  bones,  or 
cremation  ground  and  to  scratch  over  the  parts  and  to  go 


■  _ 

1  lOT 

.&]  BIjfHAT  SAMHITl  SOS 

eforo  the  traveller,  if  Indicates  evil;  If  it  be  seen  to  pass 
urine  on  a  bed  or  on  tbe  annsed  vessels  of  a  pot-man  and 
the  like  it  indicates  disgrace  to  virgins;  if  it  be  seen  to  pass 

mine  on  used  vessels  or  on  shoes,  it  indicates  disgrace 
to  the  traveller’s  wife  and  if  it  be  seen  to  pass  urine  on  a 
cow,  there  will  bo  a  mingling  of  castes. 


(e) ,  Agai n,  if  tbe  dog  be. seen  to  approach  the  traveller 
wt|!h.  a  slipper  in  its  month,  the  traveller  will  gain  his  object- ; 
if  it  be  seen  with  *  bis  mouth  full  of  flesh,  there  will  be  a  gain 
of  wealth  .if  with  a  raw  bone  in  its  mouth,  there  will  be 
good  lack;  if  it  be  seen  to  approach  with  a  burning  torch 
or  a  dry  bone  in  its  mouth,  there  will  be  death  5  if  with  a 
dead  torch,  the  person  will  receive  blows;  if  it  be  seen  to 
approach  dragging  with  it  the  head,  hands,  foot,  face  or 
other  limbs  of  a  person,  there  will  bo  gain  of  lands ;  and  it 
it  bo  aeon  to  approach  with  a  cloth,  tbe  bark  of  a  tree  and 
the  like,  there  will  be  danger.  According  to  some,  if  a, 

7v'  .  i,  It:’.'  ’p  j-'ilAf  '.'V 

dog  be  seen  to  approach  with  a  cloth  in'  its  mouth,  there 
will  be  good  luck. 


(d).  Also,  if  the  dog  bo  seen  to  enter  tbe  house  with 
a  dry-bone  in  its  month,  the  head  of  the  family  will  lio. 
If  it  bo  seen  to  enter  with  fetters,  creepers,  leas  berm  traps, 
j  opes  and  the  like,  he  will  suffer  imprisonment  If  it  be 
soon  to  shake  its  Pars,  to  gat  on  the  person  of  the  traveller 
and  to  lick  his  feet,  ho  will  meet  with  obstacles.  If  it  be 
seen  to  stop  the  traveller,  he  will  suffer  attack.  If  it  be 
soon  to  scratch  the  body,  ho  will  meet  with  opposition  and 
if  the  deg  bo  seen  to  lie  with  its  head  raised  up,  there  will 
be  evil. 


2.  If  one  or  more  dogs  be  seen  to  bark  at  the  bim 
ffom  the  middle  of  a  village,  there  will  be  a  change  of 


BIMIUT  SAM  KIT  A 


CH.  42.] 

Z\  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  back  si  the  Ban  in  the  mor¬ 
ning  from  the  Southeast  quarter  there  will  be  immediate 
fear  from  destructive  -fire  and  from  robbers;  if  it  bo  seen  to 
do  so  at  noon,  there  will  be  death  from  fire  and  it  in  the 
evening,  there  will  be  fight  and  bloodshed. 

4-  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  at  the  Sun  towards  sun¬ 
set,  farmers  will  soon  suffer.  If  it  be  seen  to  bark  turning 
to  the  Northwest  within  six  ghatikas  after  sunset,  there  wall 
be  suffering  from  winds  and  robbers, 

5-  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  at  mid -night  turning  to 
the  North,  Brahmins  will  suffer  arid  cows  will  be  carried 
away  by  robbers:  and  if  it  be  seen  to  bark  at  dawn  of  day 
turning  to  north-east,  virgins  will  suffer  from  disgrace, 
there  will  be  fear  from  destructive  fire  and  a  wiscarr  ago 
of  pregnancy. 

6.  If,  in  the  rainy  season,  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark 
cloud  from  a  heap  of  rubbish,  from  tho  king’s  palace,  the 
temple  or  the  top  of]a  house,  there  will  be  abundent  rain ;  and 
if  it  bo  .seen  to  do  so  in  auy  other  season  there  will  be  death, 
fear  from  destructive  tiros  and  suffering  from  diseases. 

7.  If,  in  the  rainy  seas  ora  when  there  is  no  rain,  the 
dog  be  seen  to  plunge  frequently  into  water  or  to  drink  it 
or  to  shako  it  off  from  its  sides,  there  will  be  rain  within 
12  days. 

8.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  at  the  mistress  of  tho 
house  with  iti' head  on  tho  thresh-hoki  while  its  body  re¬ 
mains  without,  the  master  of  the  house  will  suffer  f  rom 
disease ;  buf  if  it  be  seen  to  do  so  with  its  body  within  the 
gat©  and  its  head  without  it,  tho  mistress  of  the  house  will. 

ffer  disgrace. 

9-  If  tile  dog  bo  seen  to  scratch  the  walla  of  the  house 
there  will  be  house-breaking  by  robbers  ;  if  it  be  seen  to 
dig  the  ground  in  tho  cow-shed,  cows  will  bo  robbed  away 


I  42. If  BTSIHAT  BAHIUTA  *05  . 

and  if  ife  bo  seen  to  scratch  the  places  whore  grain  is  stored 
up,  there  will  be  gain  of  grain- 

10.  If  tho  dog  be  seen  to  eat  something  miserable 
■with  a  •weeping  eye  and  a  pitiable  look,  the  master  of  the 
house  will  suffer  grief;  and  if  it  be  seen  to  play  with  cows 
there  will  be  plenty,  prosperity,  health  and  joy, 

11.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  kiss  or  smell  the  left  knee, 
there  v'ill  be  gain  of  wealth ;  if  it  be  seen  to  kiss  the 
right  knee,  there  will  be  quarrel  with  women  ;  it  it  be  seen 
to  kiss  the  left  thigh,  there  will  be  sensual  enjoyment  and 
if  it  be  seen  to  bias  the  right  thigh  there  will  be  enmity 
between  friends. 

12.  If  tho  dog  be  seen  to  kiss  the  feot,  tho  traveller 
will  bo  stopped  in  his  journey  ;  but  a  person  who  does  not 
travel  will  gain  the  object  of  his  desire.  If  the  dog  be  seen 
to  kiss  the  shoes  of  a  person,  that  person  will  soon  begin 
to  travel. 

18,  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  kiss  both  the  arms,  there 
will  be  suffering  from  enemies  and  robbers  and  if  it  be  seen 
to  conceal  in  a  heap  of  rubbish,  flesh,  bones,  or  any  eatables, 
there  will  be  immediate  fear  from  destructive  fires. 

14.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  first  in  the  village  and 
then  in  tho  village  cremat  ion  ground,  tho  chief  person  of 
the  village  will  die  and  if  .it  be  seen  to  bark  towards  a  tra¬ 
veller,  it  stops  his  journey  • 

1F>.  If  tho  dog  be  seen  to  howl  with  the  sound  of  the 
letter  Oq  on  tho  loft  side  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth;  if 
with  the  sound  of  the  long  vovel  0  on  the  loft  side,  there 
will  also  be  gain  of  wealth  ;  if  with  tho  sound  of  the  let  ter  aw 
on  the  left  side,  there  will  be  ridicule  ;  and  if  it  be  seen  to 
howl  iu  any  sound  from  behind,  tho  travUer  will  meet  with 
obstacles. 


II 


ta.  |ch.  40: 

f  ,  <  f  *  ’  ' '  •)  *  V  * 

if).  If  dogs  bo  seen  to  cry  frequently  uttering  the 
hound  Shankha  as  if  beaten  with'  a  stick  or  if  they  be  seen 
to  run  in  n  cut  ve,  the  min  of  the  village  is  indicated  and 
there  will,  also  be  deaths. 

17.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  show  its  teeth.,  and  lick  its 
mouth-corners '  there  will  be  good  meals  ;  if  it  he  found  to 
lick  its  mouth,  there  will  be  obstacle  even  though  good 
meals  may  bo  within  reach. 

38.  if  dogs  be  frequently  -  seen  to  crowd  s.uid  bark  to¬ 
gether  in  the  middle  of  towns  and  villages,  the  head-man 
will  suffer  miseries':-  a  wild  dog  shall  be  treated  simply  as 
a  wild  beast. 

39.  if  dogs  bo  seen  to  bark  near  trees  there  will  be 
rain;  if  they  bark  near  Ittdra’a  banner,  the  minister  will 
suffer  j  if  they  bark  in  the  middle  of  the  "house,  the  master 


iff 


of  the  house  will  suffer  from  windy  complaint  unci  if  they 


be  seen  to  bark  from  the  gates  of  towns,  the  towns  will 


20.  If  the  dog  be  seen  to  bark  from  a  bad,  the  master 
:  tlie  bed  will  suffer  miseries  in  Ids  travel  ;  if  it  bo  seen 
to  cry  from  behind,  there  will  be  fear  and  if  it  bo  seen  to 
go  round  men  from  left  to  right  and  then  bark,  there  will 
be  trouble  from  enemies. 


CHAPTER  XLIII.  (90.) 


V. 


.  Os  Tub  Cry  or  The  JackAe, 

1.  .All  that  lias  boon  said  of  the  dog  applies  also  to 
tho  Jackal  There  are  however  a  few  special  points  bo  be 
noticed.  The  jackal  becomes  rufctidi  in  the  Sisira  season 
(from  middle  of  January  to  that  of  March)  when  its  acts 
signify  nothing.  If  the  jackal  be  seOrt  to  cry  hoo-hoo  first 


uhl  i t-A’j.  next,  the  cry  is  benefic 


.All  other  cries 


are 


male 


he- 


t  4l?.]  '  SH4T0&T  SW^IITA 


'  '  " '  '  ;  ., 

2-  Jfahka  is  tho  natural  cry  of  tho  jackal  khcwn  ns 
Lomasika ;  it  imlioatos  good  luck.  All  other  erica  iadi* 
cate  evil. 

3.  Tla  o  cry  of  the  jackal  .in  the  east  end  in  the  north 
indicates  good  luck;  if  the  cry  be  towards  a  Santa  (be.,:,  efic) 
quarter  the  person  will  be  respected  everywhere.  If  the 
cry  be  towards  tho' Bhumita  quarter  and  be  malefic  in  its 
nature,  the  lords  of  such  quarter  will  suffer  miseries. 

i.  In  whatsoever  quarter  the  Jackal  may  be,  if  its 
cry  be  towards  a  Beepfcn  (malefic)  quarter,  there  will  be 
prosperity.  The  cry  at  noon  indicates  great  •  evil ;  the  cry 
of  the  jackal  in  the  South  and  towards  the  S.m.  indicates 
misery  to  the  town  and  army. 

If  Yahi 1  lie.  jackal  there  will  be  injury 

from  fire.  If  tata  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  death.  If  Dkik 
—Wdh  be  the  cry,  wicked  deeds  will  be  committed  ;  if  the 
cry  be  that  of  the  jackal  with  a  flaming  mouth,  the  country 
will  meet  with  rnin, 

6.  According  to  some,  the  cry  of  the  j  ickal  of  the 
darning  mouth  does  not  indicate  evil.  The  mouth  of  tho 
jackal  appears  bright  as  the  Sun  or  fire  owing  to  its  water. 

7-  If  a  jackal  facing  tho  South  be  soon  to  cry  in 
answer  to  the  cry  of  another  jackal  there  will  bo  death  by 
hanging.  If  it.  bo  found  to  do  so  facing  the  West,  there 
will  bo  death  by  drowning. 

8.  If  from  1  to  7  jackals  be  seen  to  cry  together, 
there  will  respectively  be  freedom,  from  cares,  the  receipt 
o!  good  intelligence,  gain  of  •wealth,  gain  of  m  object  of 
desire,  cares  of  the  mind,  misery  to  the  chief  person,  and 
the  gain  of  a  carriage. 

9.  If  8,  9  or  more  jackals  be  seen  to  cry  together, 
such  cry  signifies  nothing.  If  tho  group  be  found  to  cry 


'' 

(c 

»BOTAT  SA.MHK'A.  C&.  44*^ 


in  the  South,  just  the  reverse  of  the  effects  excepting*  tho 
5th  and  6th  will  occur. 

10.  If  the  cry  of  the  jackal  he  found  to  fill  man  with 
a  thrill  of  fear,  and  to  cause  the  horse  to  pass  ariae  and 
dung  there  will  ho  miseries. 

11.  The  cry  of  tla  jackal  which  stops  at  the  sound 
of  man,  the  elephant  or  the  horse  indicates  prosperity  to 
the  town  a, ml  to  the  army. 

12.  If  bhebha  be  tho  cry  of  the  jackal  there  will  he 
tear.  Jf  the  cry  be  bho-bho  there  will  he  danger  ;  if  it  he 
phipKa,,  there  will  be  death  or  imprisonment  and  if  huhu  bo 
the  crjr,  there  will  be  prosperity. 

13.  If  a  benefic  jackal  while  crying  a-au  should  hear 
another  cry  as  tata  and  begin  to  cry  so  in.  response  or  if  it 

found 'io  cry  beginning  with  tho  sound  te-te  and  ending 
with  the-thc  such  cries  signify  nothing  except  that  tho 
animal  is  in  rut. 

14.  If  the  cry  of  a.  jackal  be  at.  first  found  to  bo  loud 
and  disagreeable  and  again  aa  in  response  to  the  cry  of 
another  jackal  there  will  be  prosperity,  gain  of  wealth  and 
the  return  of  a  frieuddrotn  his  travels. 


CHAPTEB  XLIV.  (91.) 

VI. 

On  Omens  Connected  With  Wiki  Animals. 

1.  If  wild  animals  be  found  to  stay,  wander  or  to 
come  and  go  within  the  limits  of  towns,  present,  past  and 
future  fears  are  indicated  respectively ;  and  if  they  are 
found  to  wander  on  all  sides  of  tho  town,  such  town  wi  II 
meet  with  ruin. 

2.  If,  when  wild  animals  enter  tho  limits  of  towns, 
their  cry  is  responded  to  by  the  cry  of  country  animals, 
villages  and  towns  will  suffer  miseries;  if  their  cry  is 


Dttl'IIA  I 


■SAM  HIT  A. 


responded  to  by  the  cry  of  other  wild  animals,  towns  and 
villages  will  be  beseigeu ;  but  if  such  cry  is  responded  to 
by  both  wild  and  country  animals,  women  will  bo  put  into 
prison  by  the  enemy. 

3,  If  wild  animals  be  found  at  the  gates  of  towns., 
such  towns  will  be  beseiged  by  the  enemy  $  if  they  be  found 
to  enter  the  towns,  such  town  will  meet  with  ruin  ;  if  they 
be  found  to  give  birth  to  their  young,  the  people  wi  11  suffer 
miseries ;  if  the  animals  be  found  to  die  within  towns, 
there  will  be  fears  of  various  kinds,  but  if  they  enter  the 
houses  there  will  be  imprisonment. 

CHAPTER  XLV  (92.) 

'o :1S:V  m  vv; 

On  Omens  Connected  With  The  Oow. 

1.  If  the  cow  appear  weak  and  dejected  the  king  will 
suffer  miseries;  if  it  walk  striking  the  ground  with  its 
heels  there  will  be  diseases.  If  the  eyes  be  found  full  of 
tear#  or  if  it  be  found  to  fear  its  owu  master  or  to  cry  at 
the  sight  of  thieves,  there  will  be  death. 

2.  If  cows  be  found  to  cry  Avhen  unmolested  there 
will  be  ruin;  if  they  cry  at  night  fchero  will  be  fear;  but  if 
the  ox  be  found  to  cry  at  night  there  will  be  good  lack.  If 
cows  bo  found  to  bo  tormented  by  flies  or  dogs,  there  will 
be  immediate  rain. 

3.  If  cows  while  coming  home  with  the  cry  of  banibku 
be  found  to  be  in  pursuit  of  bullocks  there  will  be  an 
increase  of  cows  in  the  cow- shed.  If  cows  be  found  wet  or 
with  their  hairs  on  end,  or  happy  there  will  be  an  increase 
of  wealth*  The  same  remarks  apply  to  buffaloes. 


«  rif 


BftllUT 


i1  SA3J  HT®A 


fOH.  it) 


CHAPTER  XL VI  (98). 

VIII. 

On  Omens  connected  with  the  House. 


i.  Ii  ai i.lier  tho  part;  just  behind  the  saddle  or  the  side 
ofn  horse  bp  ..accidently  burnt,  evil  is  indicated.  If  other¬ 
wise  there  will  be  good  look-  If  all  the  pa.  t.s  of  the  body 
bo  burnt,  (  here  w  ill  be  misery.  If  the  part  be  aeon  to  burn 
or  to  smoke,  the  effects  will  be  felt  ia  2  years. 

2-  If  the  organ  of  generation  catch  fire,  the  master’s 
harem  will  suffer  miseries.  If  the  belly  catch  fiire,  tho 
treasury  will  suffer;  if  the  buttocks  or  the  tail  catch  fire, 
t  here  will  be  defeat  by  tho  enemy.  If  the  face  and  the  head 
oatch  fir©,  there  will  be  success. 

3.  It  tho  mane,  the  saddle — back  and  the  shoulders 
entoh  fire,  there  will  bo  success.  If  the  logs  catch  fire, 
thero  will  bo  imprisonment.  If  the  forehead,  breast,  eyes 
or  legs  catch  fire  and  smoko,  there  will  be  defeat  ;  but  if 
they  burn  only  there  will  be  success. 

It  the  nasal  pit,  the  part  above  it,  tho  bend,  the 
part  just  below  the  ©y  os  and  the  eyes  catch  fir©  and  burn 
at  night,  there  w  ill  be  success.  It  horses  which  are  green, 
red.  black,  of  different  coiors  or  blue  catch  fire  in  any  part 
of  their  body  ,  there  will  be  tho  gain  of  a  desired  object. 


o.  If  the  horse  be  found  to  refuse  to  oat  or  drink  or 
to  fall  its  legs  striking  with  ouch  other  or  to  perspire  for 
no  apparent  cause  or  to  quake,  drop  blood  from  the  mouth 
or  to  smoke  or  not  to  sleep  at  night  and  on  the  contrary  if 
it  bo  found  to  sleep  by  day  or  be  dull  or  listless  with  its 
©yea  closed  or  to  stick  its  head  to  the  ground,  there  will  be 
misery. 


6.  If  the  horse  bo  seen  to  get  upon  another  horto 
when  tbe  latter  carries  a  saddle  or  a  man  or  if  tho  king’s 
horse,  apparently  healthy,  bo  found  to  meet  with  a  serious 
accident,  there  will  bo  misery. 


7.  If  tho  horse*  be  found  to  raise  up  its  bond  and  neigh 
or  if  it  be  found  to  neigh  sweet  and  loud  as  if  out  of  j  'y 
with  food  in  its  month,  the  enemy  will  meet  with  -inn. 


8*  If  near  a  horse  that  neighs  there  be  found  a  vessel 
full  of  grain  or  curdled  milk,  a  Brahmin,  a  temple- imago, 
sandal  paste,  flowers,  fruits,  gold  and  tho  hke  or  any 
agreeable  object,  there  will  be  success. 

y.  Ahorse  that,  is  sst'slied  and  f  cols  happy  with  il a 
food  and  drink,  bit  of  the  bi  idle  ami  saddle  trappings  and 
that  casts  a  aide-look  indicates  good  luck. 

10.  If  the  horse  be  found  to  strike  the  ground  fre¬ 
quently  with  its  left  log,  its  master  will  travel  to  foreign 
lands-  If,  during  twilight  hours,  ho  be  found  to  neigh 
turning  to  a  deepta  quarter  the  muster  will  sutler  imprison¬ 
ment  or  defeat  in  fight. 

11.  If  the  horse  bo  found  to  neigh  much  during  s’eep 
or  to  flap  its  tail,  there  will  bo  travel.  If  it  be  found  to 
drop  tho  hairs  of  its  tail  or  to  neigh  pitioualy  or  feudally  or 
to  eat  dust,  there  will  bo  misery. 

12.  If  the  horso  be  found  to  lie  on  its  right  side  liko 
a  box  sk  etching  its  right  leg^fchere  will  besucces.  All  that 
1ms  been  said  about  tho  horse  applies  also  to  other  animals 
used  for  riding. 

13.  If,  when  the  king  begins  to  get  on  bin  back,  the 
horse  be  found  to  be  quiet  and  obedient  and  to  neigh  turn¬ 
ing  to  another  horse  or  touch  his  right  side  with  bis  mouth, 
immediate  good  fortune  Is  indicated. 

14.  If  the  horse  be  found  to  pass  excrement  or  urine 
often,  or  to  refuse  to  move  even  when  whipped  or  to  get 
frightened  for  no  apparent  cause  or  to  shed  tears,  who  mas¬ 
ter  will  suffer  miseries. 

15.  Thus  have  been  described  omens  connected  with 
the  horse.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  treat  of  omens  connec- 


47. 

the 

tusk  especial ’y. 

K^fies.  —All  that  has  been  said  about  the  horse  applies 
also  to  the  elephant.  The  author  how  proceeds  to  state  cer. 
fcaiu  special  pohit-i  counected  with  the  latter- 

CHAPTER  XLVIt  $4>. 

IX- 

On  Omens  Connected  With  The  Emwiant. 

1  to  0.  Stanzas  I  to  6  are  identical  with  stanzas  20,  %, 
22,  28,  24,  and  25,  of  chapter  xxxii  (79.)  of  part.  XL 

7.  If  the  cut  be  white,  smooth  glossy  and  emitting 
good  scent,  there  will  be  prosperity.  All  that  I  now  pro¬ 
ceed  to  state  about  the  breaking  of  the  tttsfci  applies  also 
to  its  dropping  down,  becoming  thin,  and  loss  <>i  color. 

j.  The  Devos  (gods),  the  Asuras  (demons and  Naras 
(men)  reside  respectively  at  the  root,  the  middle  and  the 
one!  of  the  tasks  of  the  elephant.  The  effects  of  onions 
connected  with  these  parts  will  therefore  be  great,  mode¬ 
rate  and  small  and  they  will  come  tb-^rsa  soon,  after  a 
short  time  and  after  a  long  time  respectively. 

9.  If  the  right  tusk  be  found  to  break,  the  king,  the 
country  and  tho  army  will  suffer  miseries  ;  and  ii  the  left 
tusk  be  found  to  break,  the  master,  bis  wife,  son,  family, 
priest,  the  driver  and  the  wood-men  will  suffer  miseries. 

10  If  both  the  tusks  be  found  to  break  the  king’s  whole 
family  will  meet  with  ruin  but  if  the  breaking  occur  in 
a  bonefio  Lagoa,  lunar-day  or  Nakshatra  and  the  like,  there 
will  bo  an  increase  of  prosperity  If  it  occur  otherwise, 
there  will  be  an  increase  of  misery. 

11.  If  the  elephant  be  found  to  break  the  middle  of 
its  left  tusk  by  striking  it  against  milk  trees,  fruit  or  flower 
trees  or  the  banks  of  river 8,  the  ruin  of  the  enemy  :s  indi- 


.eHJH.-'T  SAM  RITA 


an. 


ted  with  the  elephant — the  cutting,  breaking  &-o  of 


oated  and  if  the  light  tusk  be  found  to  break,  there  will  be 
misery. 


1%.  If  the  elephant  be  found  to  walk  unsteadily,  if 
its  oars  cease  to  move,  on  a  sudden,  if  the  animal  bo  of  dejec¬ 
ted  apporanco,  or  if  it  be  found  to  put  its  trunk  to  '.he 
ground  or  to  breathe  softly  and  long,  if  tho  eyes  be  full  of 
tears,  if  tho  animal  bo  found  to  sloop  al  ways  or  to  bo  rt  stive 
or  to  refuse  to  eat.  properly  or  to  pass  excrement,  urine,  often 
there  will  bo  misery. 

13.  If  the  elephant  be  found  to  attack  and  break  at 
pleasure  ant-hills,  trunks  of  trees,  decayed  trees,  shrubs  or 
branches,  if  the  eyes  be  of  rutting  appearance,  if  the  animal 
be  prepared  to  start  on  a  journey,  if  while  being  adorned 
With  trappings  he  be  often  found  to  throw  out  drops  of 
•water’ or  to  cry  or  if  it  begin  to  rut  at  tho  time  or  coil  its 
trunk,  round  its  right  tusk,  there  will  be  success. 

14.  If  the  elephant,  while  in  Water,  be  found  to  be 
dragged  away  by  a  crocodile,  the  king  will  meet  with  ruin  ; 
but  if  lie  be  found  to  drag  the  crocodile  to  the  bank,  there 
will  be  prosperity. 

CHAPTER  XL  VIII  (95). 

x ' ; ; ; ;  v : 

On  The  Cawing  Oj?  The  Chow- 

].  In  the  case  of  the  people  inhabiting  the  Eastern 
countries,  the  crow  on  the  right  side  indicates  good  luck  ; 
bub  the  crow  of  the  crane  kind  indicates  prosperity  when 
on  the  left  side.  In  other  countries  the  case  is  otherwise- 
The  limits  of  provinces  shall  be  lea  nt  from  a  general 
knowledge  of  the  country. 

Notes:— Countries  to  the  South  and  East  of  the  river 
Saravati  are  Eastern  countries. 

2.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  a  dead  tree 
in  the  month  of  Vyeakhu  there  will  be  plenty  and  prosperi- 


Mil  MAT  JAM  KIT  A. 


ca  48.1 


ty  in  ill  country  ;  but  if  it  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  a  dry 
thorny  free,  there  will  be  famine  and  fear  in  the  land. 

5.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  an  eastern 
branch  of  the  tree  in  the  Sarat  season  there  will  be  ruin  a 
the  beginning  of  the  season  ;  if  it  be  seen  to  do  so  in  a 
western  bran  oh  in  the  rainy  season  there  will  be  much  rain  ; 
if  in  a  northern  or  southern  branch  there  will  be  moderate 
rain  in  the  middle  two  months  of  the  two  seasons;  ai  d  if 
it  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  oil  the  top  of  a  tree  there  will 
be  abundant  rain. 

4.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  build  its  lest  in  a  south- 
eastern  branch  there  will  be  rain  here  and  there;  if  in  u 
south  vk tern  branch,  the  yellow  and  green  leaves  will  grow 
and  if  in.  a  north-western  or  north-eastern  branch  there  will 
be  prosperity, 

Notes : — The  commentator  adds  that  if  the  crow  bo 
seen  to  build  its  nest  in  a  north. western,  branch  there  will 
be  an  increase  of  rate. 

5*  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  build  its  nest  in  reeds,  dir- 
bha  'grass,  shrubs,  creepers,  crops,  temples,  palaces  of  kings 
houses  or  in  low  ground,  the  country  will  suffer  from  thieves, 
drought  and  disease  and  will  meet  with  ruin. 

6.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  lay  two,  three  or  four  eggs, 
there  will  be  prosperity  ;  if  five  eggs,  a  foreign  priuco  will 
begin  to  reign  ;  if  it  be  seen  to  Jay  six  eggs  or  only  one  egg 
or  no  eggs  ac  all,  there  will  be  no  prosperity. 

%  If  the  young  ones  be  of  the  color  of  the  fragrant 
substance  known  as  Ohoraka,  there  will  be  fear  from  thieves; 
if  of  different  colors  thero  will  be  death;  if  white,  there 
will  be  fear  of  injury  from  tire  and  if  of  defective  limbs, 
there  will  be  famine. 


8.  If  a  swarm  of  crows  bo  found  to  enter  a  village 
and  cry  for  no  apparent  cause,  the  people  will  suffer  from 


hunger  and  if  they  be  seen  to  fly  round  and  round  there  will 
be  suffering  from  anger  ;  if  they  bo  seen  in  swarms  there 
will  be  quarrels. 


9.  Crows,  that  aro  seon'to  harass  men  with  their  beaks, 
wings  and  legs,  will  inpreace  a  person’s  enemies;  if  the 
crow  bo  seen  to  fly  at  night,  the  people  will  meet  with  ruin  , 

10.  If  the  crow  be  seen  bo  fly  round  and  round  fron 
left  to  right,  there  will  be  fear  of  troubles  from  one’s  own 
kinsmen  ;  if  it  bo  soon  to  fly  round  turning  from  left  to 
right  there  will  bo  fear  of  troubles  from  strangers  ;  if  it  be 
seen  to  turn  round  in  haste  and  fear,  there  will  be  a  whirl¬ 
wind. 

tl.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  with  its  head  raised  and  fiap- 
ping  its  wings,  a  person  will  meet  with  danger  in  his  tra¬ 
vels  ;  if  it  ba  seen  to  steal  away  grain,  there  will  be  suffer¬ 
ing- from  hunger ;  and  if  the  feathers  of  the  crow  be  seen  in 
an  army  there  will  be  %ht  and  theft. 

12  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  throw  ashes,  bones,  hairs 
or  feathers,  the  husband  will  meet  with  troubles  in  his  bed 
and  if  it  be  seen  to  carry  gems,  flowers  and  the  like  there 
will  be  the  birth  of  sous  and  daughters. 

IS.  If  the  crow  be  seen  with  its  rndufch  {filed 
with  sand,  grain,  wet*rarth,  flowers  and  the  like,  there 
will  be  gain  of  wealth  y and  if  it  be  seen  to  drag  away  ves¬ 
sels  from  places  frequented  by  men  of  various  classes  there 
will  be  fears  of  various  kinds- 

14.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  strike  with  its  legs 
vehicles,  weapons,  shoes,  umbrellas,  shadows  of  men.  or  the 
men  themselves  there  will  be  death;  if  it  bo  seor.  to  go 
round  a  person  or  to  throw  flowers  on  him  as  if  by  way  of 
worship,  the  person  Tf.ill  be  respected  and  if  it  be  seen  to 
pass  excrement  on  a  person,  there  will  be  gain  of  food. 


II  ;  ‘V  ■/  I”'  a 

BRJHAT  .HAMM IT i -  CH.  48 

]5.  A  person  will  g^in  that  object  which  ia  brought 
to  him  by  the  crow  and  he  will  lose  that  which  ia  carried 
aw.ty  by  the  crow.  If  such  object  be  of  yellow  color,,  there 
trill  bo  gain  or  loss  of  gold;  if  it  he  an  art  ole  made  of 
cotton,  there  will  be  gain  or  loss  of  cloth  ;nud  if  of  white 
color,  there  will  be  gain  or  loss  of  silver. 

16.  IF,  in  the  rainy  season,  the  crow  be  seen  to  caw 
from  milk  tress,  from  the  Arjiroa  tree,  the  Vanjula  tree,  the 
banks  of  rivers,  sand  banks,  there  will  be  rain  ;  and  in  other 
seasons,  if  the  crow  bo  seen  to  bar  he  in  dust  or  iu  water, 
the  sky  will  be  overcast  with  clouds, 

17.  If  two  crows  be  seen  to  cry  fearfully  from  a  tree 
there  will  be  Fear  of  great  danger  and  if  they  be  seen  to  cry 
turning  to  water  or  the  clouds  there  will  be  rain. 

18.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  move  its  wing  fearfully 
and  -trike  with  its  feet  the  branches  of  trees  there  will  bo 
fear  of  injury  from  destructive  tiros  ;  if.  it  be  seen  to  throw 
into  the  house  a  red  substance,  a  buret  substance  or  straw  or 
a  piece  of  wood,  there  will  also  be  fear  ol  injury  from  tire. 

19.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  erv  from  the  house  tar- 

•f 

ning  to  to  the  East,  South,  West,  or  North,  the  master  of 
the  house  will  respectively  suffer  from  kings,  robbers,  quar¬ 
rels  and  loss  of  cows,  if  such  quarter  be  a  deep  fa  one. 

20.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  burning  to  the  East 
when  sue!’,  quarter  is  be  node,  theme  will  be  meeting  with  an 
officer  of  the  king,  or  a  friend  and  there  will  also  be  a  gain 
of  gold,  Salya  rice  and  cooked  rice  prepared  ia  sugar. 

21.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  South¬ 
east  when  such  quarter  is  benefic  there  will  bo  a  meeting 
with  a  person  living  by  fire  and  the  gain  of  a  women  and  of 
precious  metals,  if  it  bo  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  benefic 
Sou'-h,  theve  will  be  a  gain  of  black  gram,  horse-gram  and 
excellent  meals  and  a  meeting  with  singers- 


4$.J  BafttAT  SAMHITA 

(22) .  IF  the  ci’ow  be  seen  to  cry  ti 
flc)  south  west,  (here  will  be  meeting,  with  a  messenger  and 
the  gain  of  articles  of  luxury,  curdled  milk,  oil,  flesh  and 
good  me  vis  and  if  it  bo  seen  to  cry  turning  to  tbe  (benefio) 
west,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  flesh,  liquor,  grain  and  the 
gems  of  tho  •oa- 

(23) .  Tf  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  oho 
(bom  fie)  north-west,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  weapons,  of 
lotns,  twining  creepers,  fruits  and  meals;  and  if  it  bo  seen 
to  cry  turning  to  the  (benefic)  north,  there  will  be  the  gain 
of  food,  horse  and  cloths' 

(24) .  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  (bene 
lie)  noth-east,  there  will  be  tho  gain  of  ghee  and  of  oxen. 
The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  crow  found  seated  in  tho 
several  parts  of  a  person’s  house. 

(25) .  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  pass  close  to  the  ears  of 
a  person  at  the  commencement  of  a  journey,  there  will  be 
good  hick  and  the  gain  of  a  desired  object  ;  and  if  tbe  crow 
be  seen  to  come  flying  and  cawing  towards  the  traveller  he 
will  return  from  his  .journey. 

(hi).  If  the  crow  bo  first  seen  to  cry  on  the  left  side 
and  then  on  the  right  side  of  a  traveller,  lie  will  be  robbed 
of  bis  money  and  i  f  the  re  verse  be  tho  case,  there  will  be 
tbe  gain  of  money. 

(27).  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  and  follow  tho 
traveller  on  the  left,  side,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth; 
in  tic  esse  of  the  people  of  eastern  countries,  the  crow 
must  follow  the  traveller  on  tho  right  side  instead  of  oa 
the  lef  t. 

28.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  fly  crying  towards  the 
bawdier  on  the  .Wit  side,  there  will  bo  obstacles  in  the 
wiy;  but  if  the  person  bo  not  a  traveller,  he  will  meet 
With  good  luck. 

23 


1$  rsi  it  At  eAMKii’A  [oh.  4 

kfb  If  the  orow  be  seen  to  cry  first  oil  the  right  side 
and  then  on  the  left,  there  will  bs  the  gain  of  a-  desired 
object  -;  if  it  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  traveller  or  fly 
before  him  there  will  be  immediate  gain  of  wealth* 

50.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  turning  to  the  traveller 
and  fly  away  behind  him  on  the  right  side,  the  person  will 
noon  get  wounded,  also  if  the  crow  bo  seen  to  stand  ou 
ono  leg  and  cry  turning  to  the  Moon,  the  person  will  get 
wounded. 

51.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  stand  on  one  leg  turning 
to  the  Bun  and  scratch  its  wings  with  its  beak,,  the  chief 
person  will  suffer  at  the  hands  of  his  enemies. 

82,  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  in  a  field  full  of  crops, 
there  will  be  the  gain  of  a  field  with  crops  in  it;  but  ii 
such  orow  be  malefic  in  character,  the  traveller  will  meet 
with  grief  before  crossing  the  boundary. 

S3.  If  the  crow*  be  seen  to  cry  in  trees  in  which  there 
are  fruits  and  flowers  and  which  are  covered  with  glossy 
mi .1  tender  leaves  and  are  fragrant  milky,  juicy,  without 
wounds,  erect  and  beautiful,  there  will  be  the  gain  of 
wealth.  ■*  , , 

•if.  If  the  crow  be  aeon  to  cry  in  places  covered  with 
ripe  crops  and  fall  of  grass,  in  houses,  temples,  palaces  of 
icings,  the  mansions  of  the  rich,  green  spots,  graneries  and 
■places  where  there  arc  beaefic  objects,  there  will  be  tko 
gain  of  wealth. 

35-  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  seated  in  fcho  tail  of  a 
cow  or  a  snake-hole  there  will  be  the  sight  of  a  serpent ;  if 
it  be  seen  to  cry  from  the  back  of  a  buffalo  there  will  be 
fever  that  very  day  ;  and  if  from  a  bush,  there  will  be  au 
imperfect  gain  of  an  object  of  desire. 

86.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  from  a  heap  of  rubbish 
or  from  a  bone  on  tho  left  side  the  person  will  meet  with 


BBIJUT  SA  3.1  HIT  A, 


213 


obstacles  in  his  attempt  to  gain  an  object ;  and  if  it  be  seen 
to  cry  from  an  elevated  space,  a  burnt  'place,  ov  a  place 
struck  by  lightning1,  there  \viiltbe  slaughter. 

37-  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  from  a,  good  spot  with 
thorny  trees  iu  it  there  will  be  success  of  an  undertake  ng; 
but  quarrels  at  the  same  time;  if  it  bo  seen  to  cry  from  a, 
thorny  tree,  there  will  bo  quarrels  and  if  from  a  place  over¬ 
grow  n  with  creepers,  there  will  bo  imprisonment- 

38.  If  the  crow  be  seon  to  cry  from  a  tree  whoso  end. 
lias  been  cut  off,  there  will  bo  suffering  from  sword  cub  it’ 
from  a  dried  tree,,  there  Will  bo  quarrel  ;  if  from  a  dung  hill 
either  before  or  behind,  there  will  be  the  gain  wealth. 

39.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  cry  from  the  body  or  the 
limbs  of  a  dead  person  there  will  be  deaths  ;  and  if  it  be  seen 
t..»  cry  breaking  a  bone  with  its  beak,  there  will  be  a  frac- 
ture  of  bones. 

40.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  holding  in  his  mouth  a 
Effing,  a  bone,  a  piece  of  wood,  a  thorn  or  any  weak  sub¬ 
stance,  there  will  respectively  be  suffering  from  a  snake, 
from  diseases,  from  tusked  animals,  thieves,  creepers  and 
fire. 


41,  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  holding  iti  its  mouth  a 
white  flower,  an  impure  substance  or  flesh,  tli  eve  will  bo  gain 
of  Wealth  to  tho  traveller ;  if  it  bo  seen  to  cry  with  its 
head  raised  and  striking  its  wings  on  its  sides,  thero  will 
be  obstacles  in  the  w ay. 

42.  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  holding  in  its  mouth  a 
string,  a  strap  of  leather/  or  a  twining  creeper,  there  will  bo 
imprisonment  and  if  it  be  seen  to  cry  from  a  ston  e,  thero 
will  bo  a  meeting  with  a  new  traveller  who  had  suffered 
much  from  foot-journey, 

13.  If  crows  bo  seen  to  exchange  food  with  one  another 
there  will  bo  great  happiness ,  if  the  rna’e  and  the  female 


BEIH&T  SAJiai'i’A  [OH. 

crow;'  bo  board  to  cry  fcogethei*  there  wiil  bo  the  gain  of 
a  woman. 

44.  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  cry  from  a  we!l  -fi  led  water 
pot  on  the  bead  of  a  woman,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  a 
woman  or  wealth;  if  it  be  seen  to  strike-  the  pot  with  its 
feet,  the  person’s  son  will  meet  with  danger  ;  and  if  it  bo 
seen  to  pass  excrement  into  the  pot,  there  will  be  the  gain 
of  meals-. 

45.  If,  when  an  army  begins  to  encamp  in  a  place, 
the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  striking  its  wings  on  its  sides,  the 
army  will  meet  with  success  itr  some  other  place  ;  and  if  ife 
be  seen  to  cry  without  moving  its  wings,  there  will  be  only 
fear  and  nothing  serious  will  happen. 

46.  If  the  crow,  accompanied  by  a  vulture  and  a  bo¬ 
ron,  be  semi  to  enter  an  army  without  fighting  there  will, 
ba  good  luck  and  if  they  happen  to  bo  at  strife  there  will 
be  fight  between  the  enemies- 

47-  If  the  crow  bo  seen  to  cry  from  the  back  of  a  pig^ 
chore  will  be  imprisonment ;  it'  it  bo  seen  to  cry  from  the 
backs  of  two  pigs  covered  with  mire,  there  will  bo  the  gain 
of  wealth ;  if  from  the  back  of  an  ass  or  a  camel,  there  will 
be  prosperity.  According  to  some,  if  the  crow  be  seen  to 
cry  from  the  back  of  an  ass  there  will  be  imprisonment- 

48  If  the  crow  be  seen  to  cry  from  the  back  of  a 
horse,  there  will  be  gain  of  a  vehicle ;  if  it  be  seen  to  cry 
following  another  crow,  there  will  be  blood-shed.  The 
same  remarks  apply  to  other  birds- 

Notes; — These  nmsfc  be  carnivorous  birds  such  us 
i  he  owl,  the  vulture,  the  hawk  and  the  like. 

49.  The  crow  in  the  several  points  of  the  compass 
indicates  the  same  effects  as  those  described  for  other  omi¬ 
nous  birds. 


4?.]  JJUIHAT  SAM0ITA. 

tO,  If  the  crow  bo  board  to  cry  caw  from  its  nest,  the 
cry  signifies  nothing  }  but  it  it  bo  beard  to  cry  hetv  tbero 
will  be  hilarity  of  mind  ;  and  if  ka  bo  tbo  cry,  there  will  bo 
a  meeting  with  an  intimate  friend. 

51.  If  kata  bo  the  cry  of  the  crow,  there  will 
be  quarrel;  if  kwru-him  bo  the  cry  there  will  bo  joy; 
if  kata-kata  be  the  cry  there  will  bo  gain  of  rice  prepared 
in  urdled  milk;  if  lid  ke  or  leu  ku  be  the  cry,  tbero  will  bo 
gain  of  wealth  to  the  traveller. 

52.  If  k'have-khare  be  tlie  cry  of  the  crow  there  will 
be  n  meeting  with  a  foot  passenger.  If  hha-kha  be  the  cry, 
the  traveller  will  meet  with  death  ;  if  khala-khala  bo  the 
cry  there  will  be  an  obstacle  to  journey  and  rain  that  same 
day. 

53.  If  ka  Jca  be  the  cry  of  the  crow,  there  will  be 
obstacles  it  ka  ka-tto  be  the  cry  there  will  bo  injury  to 
meals;  if  hava-lcava  be  the  cry  there  will  bo  joy;  and  if 
kayahi  bo  the  cry  there  will  bo  imprisonment. 

54.  If  Icara  Jcav  bo  the  cry  of  the  crow  tbero  will  be 
rain  ;  if  gwl  bo  the  cry  there  will,  be  fear,  if  vat  be  the  cry 
there  will  be  gain  of  cloths  ;  if  kalaya  be  the  cry  there  will 
be  a  meeting  of  the  Budras  and  tlie  Brahmins. 

55 .  If  phat  be  the  cry  of  the  crow  there  wilt  be  gain 
of  fruits  ;  if  phala  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  the  sight  of 
serpe.  Is;  if  tat  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  suffering  from 
blows  ;  if  stree  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  the  gain  of  women  j 
if  gat  be  the  cry  there  will  he  the  gain  of  a  cow ;  and  if 
piU  be  the  cry  there  Will  be  the  gain  of  flowers* 

56.  litakvitdkuhe  the  cry  of  the  crow  there  will  bo 
tight ;  if  gwJiu  be  the  cry  there  will  be  injury  from  fire ;  if 
hita-kate  be  the  cry,  there  will  be  fight;  and  such  sounds  as 
takvli;  chintichi ,  he  k&  ka  and  purctncha  indicate  bad  look. 


2  32  R  1.0 AT  SAMHITA#'  [OH.  4 

47.  If  two  crows  be  seen  to  cry  together  or  to  move 
together,  tire  effects  will  be  the  same-  All  the  above  re¬ 
marks  apply  to  omens  connected  with  other  birds;  and  all 
that  lias  been  said  about  tlio  dog  applies  also  t.o  wild 
tusked  animals. 

5S.  If  the  creatures  of  land  and  water,  be  seen  to 
change  their  nature  in  the  rainy  season  there  will  bo 
abundant  rain  and  if  they  do  so  in  any  other  season,  there 
will  be  great  fears.  If  there  bo  no  honey  in  tho  hives,  fcho 
country  will  be  wasted ;  and  if  bees  black  at  the  bead  bo 
e:cen  to  disappear,  there  will  be  deaths. 

59.  If  ants  be  seen  to  throw  their  eggs  in  water  there 
Will  be  no  rain  and  if  they  be  seen  to  ascend  a  bank  and 
approach  the  foot  of  a  tree  with  their  eggs,  there  will  bo 
immediate  rain. 

60.  Effects  of  omens  ocucrriug  at  tho  commencement 
of  a  work  will  come  to  pass  that  same  day.  Omens  shall 
be  observed  at  the  time  of  commencement  of  a  work,  a 
journey  or  re-entry  into  the  house  after  a  journey.  Sneez¬ 
ing  is  said  never  to  indicate  good  luck. 

01.  Tho  learned  in. the  science  say  that  a  king  who 
observes  omens  carefully  and  regulates  his  acts  according 
to  their  indications  enjoys  prosperity that  ho  will  succeed 
in  all  his  attempts,  that  he  will  successfully  afford  protec¬ 
tion  to  his  subjects  and  that  ho  will  gain  all  his  objects  and 
will  bo"  in  tho  enjoyment  of  good  healtdi. 

62.  According  to  some,  tho  cry  of  a  creature  beyond 
tho  distance  of  a  krosa  signifies  nothing.  If  a  person  meets 
with  a  bad  omen  once,  tho  evils  may  bo  escaped  by  his 
performing  the  Pranaijama  11  times;  if  he  meets  with  it  a 
second  limb  he  shall  perform  the  Pranayitrna  16  times  ; 
and  if  he  meets  with  a  bad  omen  a  third  time,  ho  shall 
return  from  his  journey. 


Holes  : — A  krosa=fclie  range  of  the  voice  in  calling  or 
halloing. 


CHAPTER  XLIX.  (96.) 

SUPPLEMENTARY  TO  OMENS* 

XL 

L  A  person  learned  in  ilio  science  of  omens  shall 
make  prediction's  taking  into  necount  the  dik  (direction), 
p’ace,  motion,  sound, week  day,  the  Hakshafcra,  tiio  Muhurfcu, 
the  rising  sign,  the  Havana  (half  a  lunar  day),  tho  rising 
Havamsa  and  the  fixd,  moveable  and  the  double  nature  of 
signs  and  their  strength  or  weakness. 

2.  la  the  case  of  persons  who  do  not  proceed  on  a 
journey,  otnens  are  divided  into  two  sorts — the  stable  and 
the  unstable.  Omens  pointing  to  the  king,  the  messenger, 
the  spy  and  foreign  lands  as  well  as  those  connected  with 
troubles  and  kinsmen  are  known  as  unstable. 

6.  Omens  pointing  to  death  by  hanging,  abduction  of 
a  woman,  meals,  thieves,  fire,  rain,  festivals,  sons,  torture, 
quarrels  and  fears  are  known  as  stable  omens  if  the  sign 
occupied  by  tho  Moon  at  the  time  be  a  fixed  one  and  they 
are  known  as  unstable  omens  if  the  sign  occupied  by  tho 
Moon  at  tho  time  of  their  occurrence  bo  a  moveable  one. 

4.  Omens  occurring  in  hard  and  firm  places,  in  stone 
Louses,  in  temples,  in  laud  and  in  waters  are  known  as 
stable,-  and  omens  occurring  on  weak  or  moving  objects 
are  known  as  unstable — the  latter  omens  point  to  gain. 

5.  Omens  occurring  when  the  rising'  sign,  the 
Kakshatra,  the  JIuhurfca  and  the  Dik  are  watery  ones  and 
those  Occurring  in  water  and  on  new  and  full  Moou 
periods  and  which  are  at  the  same  time  deeptot,  (malefic)  and 
attended  with  sound  point  to  gain  ;  also  it  the  creatures  of 
water  be  Santa  (beudie)  there  will  be  rain. 


r 


124 


mmm 


mm  SAMniTA.  [oil.  ^ 

6.  Ominons  cries  occurring  ia  the'  -direction,  rising 
sign,  Mnhums  and  places  appropriate  to  fire  and  when  the 
Sun  is  Deepta  (malefic)  point  to  injury  by  fire.  Ominous 
cries  of  a  malefic  character  occurring  in'  thorns  and  leafless 
creepers  when  the  Karana  at  the  time  is  Bhadra  and  w  hen 
the  rising  sign  is  either  Capricorn  or  Aquarius  point  to 
thieves. 


7.  If  tho  creatures  of  the  village,  malefic  in  cha- 
racier  and  iti  their  tone  and  motion,  be  found  to  cry  from 
iihovny  trees  and  an  either  side  of  the  sou tu-wes tern  quar¬ 
ter  when  tho  rising  sign  is  either  Aries  or  Scorpio  there 
will  he  quarrels. 

8.  If  oreaturos,  malefic  in  character,  be  found  to  cry 
with  their  nocks  bent  to  tho  ground  and  from  one  of  the 
four  corners  when  tho  rising  sign  is  Cancer  or  when  the  ri¬ 
sing  sign  or  Navamsa  is  either  Taurus  or  Libra  there  will 
be  a  meeting  vi'ith  a  woman  dud  the  woman  will  be  one  of 
the  class  belonging  to  the  particular  corner. 

9.  If  the  omen  occur  in  an  odd  lunar  day,  in  one  of 
the  prime  quarters,  and  when  the  rising  sign  is  a  malefic 
one  aud  if  tho  creature  be  of  the  male  kind  there  will  be 
a  meeting  with  a  man  and  if  tho  omen  be  of  tho  hermaph¬ 
rodite  kind  there  will  bo  a  meeting  with  a  hermaphrodite* 

Notes. 

If  the  omen  be  ono  of  a  creature  of  the  fornale  sex  and 
if  it  occur  in  one  of  the  corners  or  on  an  even  lunar  day 
when  the  rising  sign  or  Navamsa  is  that  of  Taurus  there 
will  he  a  meeting  with  a  person  of  the  class  belonging  to 
the  north-eastern  quarter. 

10  If  the  omen  be  malefic  in  character  and  occnv 
when  Leo  is  the  vising  sign  or  Navamsa  or  when  tho  Snu 
occupies  the  rising  sign,  the  chief  person  will  proceed  on  a 
jonmey  to  foreign  lands. 


/*#•  49,  ]  BBIHAT  SAMffltA  22^ 

■11..  At  .the  time  of  cnriuneneemonfc  of  a  work  it  tlm 
rising  sign  be  odd  when  tjemited  from  tho  .sign  occupied  by 
the  Sun,  the  work  will  end  well  and  if  it  be  an  even  aiga 
the  attempt  will  fail. 

12.  I  f  the  omen  be  malefic  in  character  and  occur 
when  the  Bun  occupies  the  12th  house  from  the  rising  sign, 
the  person  concerned  will  lose  his  right  eye  ;  and  it’  at  the 
time.,  the  Sun  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  be  aspeoted  by 
malefic  planets  the  person  will  lose  both  his  eyes  j  if  at  the 
firne,  the  Sun  occupy  sign  Leo  and  be  aspected  by  malefic 
planets  the  person  will  become  lame  or  deaf  or  an  idiot. 

M.  If  at  the  time  of  occurrence  of  an  omen  malefic 
planets  occupy  tho  sixth  house  and  be  aspects#  at  the  sumo 
time  by  other  malohc  planets,  the  person  concerned  will 
receive  a  wound  in  the  part  of  body  which  corresponds  to 
such  sixth  house.  All  that  lias  been  said  by  me  regarding 
wounds,  moles  and  the  like  in  my  Jat«ka  applies  here  also 

(vide  stanzas  24  &  25  of  OH.  V  of  Varaha  Mihira’e  Bnlmfc 
Jataka). 

14.  If,  at,  the  time  of  query,  the  rising  sign  or  Ka- 
vamsa  be  a  movable  one  the  name  of  the  person  with  whom 
there  will  be  a  meeting  will  consist  of  two  syllables;  if  tho 
rising  sign  or  Navem.sn  ben.  fixed  one  tho  name  will  consist 
of  four  syllables  and  if  it  be  both  movable  and  immovable 
the  name  will  be  a  combination  of  two  names  and  will  con¬ 
test  of  three  or  five  letters. 

L->.  If  tho  power Ltd  planet  be  Mars  the  letters  will 
vie  of  tho  gionp  /•#,  klta>  ya,  ghi,  nga  ;  if  the  powerful  planet 
be  Venus  the  letters  will  bo  of  the  group  >vz,  eh",  ja,  jha, 
nj's  if  the  planet  bo  Mereury  the  letters  wilt  be  those  of 
1  hegroup  lajk^da,  dkn  m;  if  the  planet  bo  Jupiter  the  letters 
will  belong  to  the  group  ta,  th%,  da,  f  tin.  planet  be 

baturr.  the  Jeii  »  g  to  tho  gt  &a,  dka,  m  , 

29 


RimrAi  .5 a  ;i,u’.v 


303 


"i(  the  planet  bp  the  Moon. the  letters  belong.  to  the  group,  ya 
fi,  (,o,  pa,  HU)  #/•■*,  su  hu  and  if  the  planet  be  the  Sun,  the  let¬ 
ters  belong  t.o  the  group  of  vowels  from  a  to  an- 

16.  Also  in  the  cases  of  the  planets  from  the  Son  to 
Sab'mV.  the  names  will  bo  the  names  of  the  Doves  Agni,  Va¬ 
rum ,  iS-tiL  nirmnia,  Vishnu,  Inclva,  fnflratii  anti  Brafam  res- 
pe-fcively.  The  particular  name  required  shall  be  deter' 
mined  from  the  number  of  syllables  it  consists  of. 

1 7.  If  at  the  time  of  query,  relating  to  the  age  of  a 
person,  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  be  the  Moon,  Mars,  Mer¬ 
cury,  Venus,  Jupiter,  the  Sim  or  Saturn,  the  age  will  res¬ 
pectively  be  that  oi  infancy  (1  to 41,  boy-hood  to  to  8), 
period  succeeding  investiture  with  the  thread  ,9  to  1  -), 
youth  (13  to  82)  middle-age  (33  to  50),  old  age  (31  to  -0) 
and  dotage  (abovo  70). 


CHAPTER  L  197) 

On  Effective  IVuods 

1  In  the  case  of  the  Sun,  the  effects  will  occur 
after  a  fortnight  ;  in  the  case  of  the  Moon,  after  a  month; 
in.  the  or  so  of  Mars  after  the  same  period  as  that  stated  tor 
the  retrograde  motion  of  planets;  in  the  case  of  Mercury 
the  effects  will  occur  before  hie  disappearance  and  in  the 
case  of  Jupiter,  after  a  year. 

%  In  the  ease  (  f  Venus,  the  effects  will  occur  after 
6  months  ;  in  the  case  ot  Saturn  after  a  year  and  in  the  case 
of  Rahu  alter  ©mouths.  If  the  mutter  refers  to  a  Solar  eclipse 
the  effects  will  occur  after  n  year  and  in  the  case  of  solar 
spots  known  as  Twaslita  and  Keelaka  the  effects  will  be 
felt  that  same  day  (vide  stanvas  6  and  7  of  CH  Ill  Part  I). 

3.  Effects  of  phenomena  connected  with  i ho  appea¬ 
rance  of  dark  comets  will  occur  after  three  months  ;  those  of 


phenomena  connected  with  the  appearance  of  white  com  els 
will  occur  after  seven  days  ;  effects  ot  halos,  rainbows  during 


■s 

will  be  felt  after  svevn  day,?. 

4.  Effects  indicator  by  abnormal  changes  of  tem)  ’-m- 

tu re,  bv  tliO  appearance  of  iruifi$  and  tlowers  out  ol  siasoti, 
by  the  flaming  horizon  a.1  <i  by  portents  iclnting  to  1  >*0 
motion  6f  unmoving  Ik  the  refusal  to  hiove  of 

moving  bodies' and  to  abnormal  births  will  bo  felt  altei  t> 
months. 

5.  Effects  indicated  by  portents  relating  to  the  com¬ 
pletion  Of  an  event  '  >ut  an  agent,  to  earth. quakes,  to 
severe  calami ties,  to  nuvloflc  symptoms  Bucn  ns  those 
connected  wuli  bcmia  lire  and  by  portent^  relating  1°  the- 
drying  of  a  wet  hi. bnaneo  and  to  the  course  <  f  t i vers  will 
occur  after  6  months. 

6.  Effects  of  portents  connected  with  pillars  and  the 
like,  with  graneriea,  the  tern  pie- images-thei r  speech,  v  cop  ¬ 
ing  quaking  and  swotting,  cattle-light?  ami  fight  between  •  ••  o 
people  of  a  bouse  during  twilight  hours  and  the  appearance 
of  t  he  rainbow  at  night  and  lightning  will  be  felt,  after  three 
weeks. 

7.  Effects  of  portents  connected  with  the  increase  of 
worms,  rats,  flies  and  snakes  ami  of  those  connected  with 
Ilia  sound  of  birds  and  ;umaa,ls  and  with  t  he  floating  ol  a 
lump  of  earth  on  water  will  be  fob  after  three  mouth*. 

8.  Effects  indicated  by  dogs  and  the  like,  by  the  crea¬ 
tures  of  tin  village  bearing  their  young  in  the  woods,  by 
the  ►mi try  of  wild  animals  into  the  village  and  the  so  vein 
nbiit  mitl  phenomena  connected  uith  bee-hives,  town  gates, 
and  frniru,  Dwaja  will  ho  felt  after  a  y car  or  n  longer  period. 

0.  Effects  c  mneeted  with  swarms  of  the  jiickai  and 
the  vulture  will  be  felt  alter  10  days.  Those  of  phenomena 
connect  oh  with  mysterious  irnsical  sound  will  bft  felt  that 
fame  day.  Those  ^  phenomena  connected  with  disagree- 


BRTHAT  SAMHTTA  227 

and  color  of  the  twilight  sky  and  of  clouds 


kvi  light  hour 


BKIHAT  SAXftifA. 


ICir.  50 


ablo  sounds  will  bo  fait  after  a  fortnight  and  also  effects  of 
phenomena  connected  with  ant-hills  and  openings  on  the 
Ruyiace  of  the  earth  will  also  be  iolt  after  a  fortnight. 

JO.  Effects  'of pro tenta*  relating  to  the  appearance  of 
Ero  where  there  is  no  fire  and  the  shower  of  ghee,  oils, 
am  mu.  of  flesh  and  the  like  will  be  felt  that  same  day  >  and 
1  he  offects  of.  casual  words  of  women  and  children  will  bo 
felt  after  a  month  and  a  half. 

1 1”,  Effects  of  portents  relating  to  umbrellas,  piles  of 
bricks,  the  sacrificial  post,  Ere,  and  seeds  will  be  felt  after 
three  months.  According  to  some,  effects  of  portents  reiat- 
ihg  <»  umbrellas,  gates  and  towers  will  be  felt  after  a  month, 

12.  Effects  of  portents  relating -to  the  friendly  union 
of  creatures  of  deadly  natural  enmity,  to  sounds  heard  in 
tlie  sky  and  to  the  union  of  tho  cat  and  the  mongoose  with 
the  rat  will  be  felt  after  a  month. 

1  •»  *  Effects  of  tho  appearance  of  cloud-castles  will  be 
felt  after  a  month  and  effects  of  portents  relating  to  juice, 
gold  ,  Gag-staff,  houses  aud  to  dust  storms  and  smoke  will  also 
be  felt  after  a  month. 

14.  Effects  of  phenomena  occurring  in  the  eight  con. 
stellations  from  Aswan  will  bo  fell  after  9,  1,  8,  l,  l,  0,  3, 
aud  3  months  respectively1  and  tho  effects  of  those  occurring 
in  the  constellation  of  Asiesha  will  be  felt  that  same  day. 

15.  Effects  of  phenomena  occurring  in  the  ten  constell¬ 
ations  from  Mngha  will  be  felt  after  I,  6,  6,  3,  |,8,  3,  6,  1 
and  1  months  respectively.  Effects  of  those  occurring  in 
the  constellations  of  P.  Ashadha  and  U.  Asbadha  will  lie 
felt  after  four  months  and  tho  effects  of  those  occurring  in 
tho  constellation  of  Abhijit  will  be  felt  that  sumo  day. 

1G.  Effects  of  phenomena  occurring  in  the  remaining  6 
constellations  from  Sravana  will  he  fuff  after  7,  8,  ft,  3,  3i 
nud  3  mouths  respectively. 


vMlm&s,! 


37.  Jf  the  effects  bo  not  felt  soon  after  the  pern 
mentioned,  they  will  bo  felt  with  greater  severity  efrec 
double  the  period,  if  no  step*  bo  adopted  for  their expiation 
;>y  dip  gift  of  gold,  go 1 1 o'  and  cows  and  by  the  pi  rf  n.ianoo 
of  expiatory  ceremonies  with  the  help  of  Brodimi m. 

CHAPTER  LI  (98). 

On  Tar  Constrllations 

■ 

1A  2  *  Thft  number  of  Stars  of  the  virions  constellu- 
ii  us  froiip  Aswitii  are  8,  8,  6,  5,  3,  l,  5,  6,  ^  5,  6,  15,  5,  i, 
i;  >,  -I,.  3jjl  I,  2,  t’.i  o.  JOO,  l.i,  8  and  32  . : 

hers  also  represent  the  various  stellar  periods. 

3.  In  matters  commoted  with  marriage  these  numbers 
represent  years  after  which  the  effects  ind o  ared  will  bo 
folt.  Recovery  from  fever  and  the  like  will  begin  alter  so 
many  days. 

4  A  5.  The  following  table  contains  the  names  of  the 
Betas  presiding  over  the  several  constellations 


|  Constella¬ 
tions. 


Bovas. 


Constella¬ 

tions' 


1 


o. 

'Ci' 


As  wild 

Rhamni 

3[.K  ri.tikft 

4  Ro hini 

5  Mrigaairsha 
Gi  Arclrn 
7fpu  iiar  Vasa 
8|  Fnshya 
OjAslesha 

lOjMagha 
1 1  F.  Phalgtmi 
12'TT.  Fhalgan 
1 3  1  fast  a 
1  kCImra 


A  s w  i  n  i  Be  vas  !  5  S  wa  r  i 


Yarn  a 

Agrti 

Prajapati 
Soma 
Rudia 
A  did 

Brihaapati 

»Sarpa 

Piti'is 

Bhaga 

A  5-yama 

Savjfra 

Tvvashtri 


G  Vi  Sakha 
|1  7|Annradha 
1 8 Jyoshta 
HlMula 
-O'l*.  Ashadh  a 
2ljU  A  shad  ha 
22  Abhijit 
|23|Sravana 
)24;Sravishta 
2  A  Sat  a  bids  hah 
j2djPRhadrttpHdf 
1 2  7  iUB  fa  a  d  i  ap&da  |  Ahirbudlmya 
'•?y'Revati  Push  a 


!  Vayu 
Tndragni 
iM.tr  a 
ludra 
i'rttj&pafci 
A  pa 

V  isvadeva 
Brahma 

jYasa 
lYarutia 
lAiuilcHpat 


IiF.IHAT  .SAM BUM 


[f'H.  M 


jppl 


- 


(5  Of  those  28  consignations.,  thoso  of  fT.  Phalgum* 
TJ.  Ashaillia  and  U.  BhadrapiuU  together  with  the  cons- 
i* 'll  a*  ion  of  Rohini  are  known  as  (D'lruva)  stable  asierisras. 
Obnitiktuvn  of  kings,  expiatory  cere mom< 
the  building  of  towns,  acts  of  publ  ic  uiiiiry>  f  he  sow  Og  of 
Be  nin  and  acts  of  permawont  c fleets  shall  be  .c  immono-d 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  stable  asfcorisran. 

h  7.  The  constellation  u  Mala,  Ardr-t,  Jyeabfa  rnd 
Antosha  are  known  as  bTikslma)  sharp  asterimia-  Punish - 
Micit,  mesmerism,  exorcism.  imprisonment  of  person,  acts 
of  torture?  of  separntoin  or  of  uuioii  shall  be  commenced 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  sharp  aster Ums. 

8.  The  constellations  of  P.  Phalguni,  P.  Asltadha,  f  • 
Bhadrapada.  Bharani  and  Mngha  are  known  as  (TTggra) 
severe  asterisms.  Acts  of  disgrace,  tlfestractlon,  deceit-, 
Imprisonment,  poison,  burning,  beating  with  weapons  and 
the  like  shall  be  done  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
severe  astorisms. 

9.  The  constellations  of  Hastn,  Aswini,  and  Prishyn 
r,rr  known  as  (Laghn)  light  nsfcerisms.  bales,  acts  of  sex  mil 
lav b  acquisition  of  knowledge,  wearing  of  ornaments,  vros> 
sculpture,  medicine  purchase  of  carriage  and  the  like  shall 
be  commenced  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  light 
asteristns. 

t  JO,  The  contellations  of  A.  n  u  rad  no,  Cltitra,  l.o\ ati  and 
Mrignsirshn.  are  known  as  (Mridu;  soft  astcrisms.  Acts  of 
friendship,  soxmd  union,  the  purchase  of  cloths,  and  iho 
wearing  or  making  of  ornaments,  any  auspicious  deeds  a  nd 
ion  sic  shall  be  communed  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
soft  asterisms. 

11.  Tho  constellations  of  Kvittika  and  Visakbar.ro 
known  ns  (Mridu  Teekshana)  Soft  arid  sharp  asterisms  a. id 
they  produce  tffeets  of  mixed  character.  Smvaua,  Sravi- 


■o  o. 


5t] 


,,5  B  RI  HAT  BA  11  FT' IT  A  23 

**' 

Shu,  SataVJnsh-Jc,  Haste  and  Swnt.i  are  nsfcorisms' through 
which  when  the 'Moon  passes  shall  be  commenced  ',v  >rl  .-:  ui 
a  moving  cl  nvet' v. 

12.  A  person  shall  get  shaved  when  ihe  a'-terism  of 
Hcsta,  Chitra,  Sravishta  SWati,  Mi  igasirgha,  Snivana, 
Satabhislmb,  Itevati,  ilswini,  Jyeshta,  L’ushya,  or  Puum-yastt 
may  hep  pen  to.  rise  or  iri  the  Mp.boo.rta  of  such  asterisms  or 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  them,  or  when  the  axterism  is 
ft  bene  fie  one  for  the  person — •when  it  is  an  even  one  or  the 
ninth  one  from  the  asterism  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the 
time  of  a  person’s  birth. 

13.  A  person  who  has  just  bathed  and  js  wet,  one 
that  proceeds  on  a  journey,  a  person  who  has  dressed  and 
adorned  himself,  one  who  lias  got;  himself  rubbed  oil,  one 
who  has  taken  his  meaJ.es  and,  a  person  who  has  received 
blows  in  a  field  of  battle  shall  not  get  themselves  shaved* 
Shaving  is  prohibited  in  twilight  hours,  hours  of  night,  on 
Tuesdays,  Saturdays  and  Sundays,  on  Rikta  (a)  Tithies,  on 
the  ninth  lunar  day  and  when  the  Kama  is  Bhudra. 

J 1-  When  directed  by  the  Icing  or  with  the  consent  ©£ 
tlie  Brahmins  or  on  occasions  of  ju\  rrhige  or  pollution,  or 
wlton-  a  person  is  released  from  jail,  or  at  I  he  commencement 
of  s  icrifipial  rites,  a  person  may  got  shaved  on  any  day  iu 


the  month. 

15  W  hen  the  Moon  passes  through  the  contellations  of 
Hastn,  Moo  la,  bravann,  Mrigaseorsba  and  Pu.shya  a  pttv.ou 
shall  perform  deeds  befitting  ,1  male, 

l(b  The  f various  ceremonies  of  purification,  religious 
rites,  the  practice  of  austerities  and  the  wearing  of  Zone  or 
the  Sacred  belt  shall  he  commenced  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterism  of  liana,  Itevati,  Swati,  Anuiadha, 
Pushy  a  and  Chitra  and  when  Jupiter  is  in  conjunction  with 
Mercury,  'Venus  or  the  Morn. 

(a).  Rikta  Tithi  vide  Stauna  2  next  Chapter, 


BBT  IT  AT  SAMBTSTA  fd'lL  52 

Tho  ceremony  of  bearing  fch  o  .ear  shall  be  pev- 


not  oeofpied  iiy  malefic  planets,  when  benefit?  planets  bcca- 
py  flu,  nth  and  3rd  houses  when  Jupiter  occupies  the  ris¬ 
ing  sign  or  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  asUrism  ot 
Pushya,  Robini,  Chitra,  Sravaua  of  Revati. 

18  All  works  ooratrumced  when  the  12th  house,  tho 
Kendras,  an-)  tho  Sth  house  are  not  occupied  by  planets, when 
malt  lie  planets  occupy  the  3rd,  Gt-h  and  11th  houses  and  when 
Jupiter  or  Venus  occupies  She  rising  sign  or  one  o!  the 
Kon  has,  will  end  euscoeesfully.  House-balding  or  entry 
into  h  iioiuo  shall  be  co  mine  need  when  the  rising  sign  is 
boneiic  to  the  person  or  Vthefi  it  is  a  fixed  sign. 


CHAPTER  LIT  (99). 

On  Lunar  Hats  and  Half  Lunar  bays. 

1 .  The  lords  of  the  15  lunar  days  are  respect ivey  (1) 
Brahma,  (2)  Vidhata,  (3)  Ha.  i,  (4)  Tama,  (5)  Moon.,  (fi) 
Subramnnya,  (7)  Indra,  (8)  Vnsu,  (9)  Sftvpa,  (10)  Bharma, 
(11)  Siva,  (12;  Savita,  (13)  Mamnatta  (14)  Kali  and  (15) 
Vis  wad  ova. 

2.  The  Now-Moon  day  is  sacred  to  the  Pitris.  A 
person  shall  commence  works  suited  to  the  Devas  presiding 
over  particular  lunar  days.  The  1st,  6fch  and  11th  nnar 
days  are  known  as  Nanda;  the  2nd,  7tn,  and  12fch  innai 
days  are  known  as  Bhadra;  the  3rd,  Sth  and  18th  lunar 
days  are  known  as  Vijayn j  the  4th,  dth,  am)  I4tu  hinar 
days  are  known  as  Itikta  and  the  Oth,  IGth  and  loth  lunar 
days  are  known  as  Poor  n  a. 

3  Works  directed  to  bo  done  in  particular  Nakshatras 
shall  be  done  on  lunar  days  sacred  tothe lords  of  the  Naksha- 
atras.  The  sumo  remarks  apply  fcoKarunas  and  Muhoortas. 


m 


I1BIHAT  SAMfilTA 


5,  The  lords  of'  the  seven  karunas- 


2:13 

•Bava,  Baluva, 


Koulava,  Taitila,  Gara,Yanijii,and  Yishfci,  are  XndraJBrahtna, 
Mitra,  Ary  am  a  ,  Bhu,  Sree  and  Yuma. 

Notes:— Karana  is  half  a  lunar  day.  The  seven  Karanas 
mentioned  above  are  known  as  Adhruva  or  Movable,  and 
when  eight  times  repeated  occupy  the  space  from  the  second- 
half  of'  the  first  day  in  the  Moon’s  increase  to  the  first-half 
of  tho  l-tth  day  in  its  wane. 

5 .  The  fou r  Dhru va(fixed)Kuranas  are  Sakuni.  Chatnsh- 
pada,  Nagaand  Kimatughnaand  they  begin  from  the  second 
h  alf  of  the  14th  day  of  the  waning  moon  Those  are  sacred 
to  Kali.  Vrislia,  Sarpa  and  Vayu. 

(5.  In  a  Bava  Karana  shall  bo  done  deed •;  o'.  an 
auspicious,  a  moveable  or  a  fixed  character  as  well  as  deeds 
for  the  promotion  of  a  person’s  health  or  comfort  In  a 
Balava  Karana  shall  he  done  acts  of  charity  and  acts  of 
help  to  Brahmins.  In  a  Koulava  Karan  a  shall  be  done 
joyful  deeds  and  those  for  the  acquisition  of  friends  and  in 
o.  Taitila  Karana  shall  be  done  deeds  liked  by  the  public  at; 
large  and  also  houses  shall  be  built. 

7.  In  a  Gara  Kimna  lauds  shall  be  tilled.,  seeds  sown, 
houses  built  and  the  like.  In  a  Vanik  Karana,  works  of  a 
fixed,  nature  shall  bo  done  as  wed  as  dealings  with  mer¬ 
chants.  In  a  Vishti  or  Bhaura  Karana,  auspicious  deeds 
shall  not  bo  done  but  acts  aimed  at  the  ruin  of  enemies  and 
those  connected  with  poison  may  be  done. 

8.  In  a  Sakuni  Karana  a  person  shall  do  acts  for  the 
increase  of  his  health  and  comfort,  shall  take  medicine  and 
shall  learn  or  repeat  tboMoola  mantras  (magical  formulae.) 
In  a  ChatushpadaKaraua  a  person  shall  do  deeds  connected 
with  cows,  Brahmin  ;,  the  Pitris  and  the  king.  In  a  Naga. 
Karana  a  person  shall  do  works  of  a  fixed  nature,  cruel 
deeds,  acts  of  stealth  and  wicked  deeds.  In  a  Kimstughna 

30 


Bitnu;  pAMJHTA. 


[ctr.  53. 


Kamrtftj.a  person  .shall  do  any  work  for  the  increase  of  his 
health  an|t  comfort,  as  well  ns  auspicious  deeds. 

Notes. — Mu|mrta  is  48  minutes.  The  12  hours  of 
day  an  !  12  hours  of  night  are  each  divided  into  15 
Muhurkas.  Ths  15  day-Mulmrtas  are  Sacred  respectively 
to  (1)  Rudra,  (2)  Sarpa,  (3.)  Mi  bra  ,  (4)  .Pitri,  (5)  Vnm,  (0) 
Tara.,  (7)  Viswadeva ;  (8  Vidhi,  (9)  Brahma,  (10)  Indra, 
(l.l)'Intdmgm  (12)  Diit.ya,  (IS)  Yanina,  (14)  .Aryama  and 
(15)  Blragn.  The  15  night — Mnhurfcis  are  s»cred  respecti¬ 
vely  to  (1)  Eesvyira  (2)  Ajipada,  (3)  Ahirbhudhnya,  (4) 
Pu-d-a,  (5)  tNits'aU a  (6)  Yama,  (7)  Vanhi,  (8)  Dhnta,  (2) 
Hk  d,  ( ■! 0)  Aditya>  (II.)  Guru,  (12)  Aohyufa,  (13)  Arka,  (14) 
Twaslua  and  (15)  Vayu.  Of  the  15  night— Midi  nr  baa,  the 
1st,  2nd,  6th  and  7th  shall  be  rejected  for  all  auspicious 
purposes. 


CHAPTER  LIU  (100.) 


On  Marriage  Lagnas  and  Nakahtras. 

1 .  Marriages  shall  take  place  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  the  asterism  ol'  Rohini,  U.  Phalgutii,  TJ.  Ashadha, 
U  Bhadrapada,  Revati,  Mrigasirsha,  Mala,  Anurudha, 
Magha,  Hasta  or  Swati  •  when  the  rising  -sign  is  Virgo, 
Libra  or  Geopiui ;  when  the  benelle  planets  occupy  other 
than  the  7th ,  8th  and  12th  houses,  when  the  .Moot;  occupies, 
the  2nd,  3rd  or  Hth  house;  when  the  malefic  planets 
oecupy,the  3rd,  Gth,  8th  and  11th  houses;  when  Venus  does 
not  occupy  the  6th  house  and  when  Mars  does  not  occupy 
the  8th  house  ;  and, 


2.  WnCu  the  rising  sign  is  other  than  the  2nd,  2th, 
or  Sth  house  from  the  Lagua  in  the  horoscope  of  the  bride¬ 
groom  or  the  bride ;  when  at  the  time  tlm  course  or  the 
Sun  is  benefic;  when  the  Moon  does  not  occupy  the  same 
sign  with  the  Sun.  Mars,  Satur  n  or  Venus ;  or  when  she  is 
between  two  malefic  planets;  when  lire  Yoga  is  neither  the 


BKIUAT  SAJIJHJTA. 


f)  *>? 

*-  O ' 


Vyatipada  nor  that  of  Vaidhriti ;  v/hen  the  Karaua  is  other 
than  Vishti ;  when  the  lunar  day  is  other  than  a  ilikta  one; 
when  the  week  clay  is  other  than  that  of  a  malefic  planet  ; 
when  the  Avuna  is  other  than  the  Palcshinayaua  ;  when  the 
month  is  other  than  that  of  Ohaiti  a  or  .Pousba  and  when 
the  rising'  Navamsa  is  a  human  N*vam«a- 


CHAPTER  L1Y  (Id)  (a). 

On  Tiiohakshatnus  or  The  Moon  in  the  Asterisms. 

1,  A  person  born  when  thu  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Aswini  will  he  fond  of  ornaments,  will  be  of 
fine  ap  earancf,  of  amiable  manners,  skilled  in  work  and 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Bbarani  will  be  successful  at  work,  truthful, 
free  from  diseases,  able  and  free  from  grief. 

2,  A.  person  born  when  tho  Moon  passes  though  the 
sisterism  of  Kiitfcika  will  bo  a  glutton,  fond  of  the  wives  qf 
other  men,  of  bright  appearance  and  of  wide-spread  fame. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  lino  ugh  the 
as  tori  am  of  Eohini  will  bo  truthful,  will  not  covet  tho 
property  of  other  men,  will  be  ol  cleanly  habits,  or  sweet 
speech,  of  linn  mews  and  of  lino  appearance. 

3-  A  p  rson  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  tho 
astemin  of  Mrigasirsha  will  bo  of  no  firm  views,  will  be 
able,  timid,  of  good  speech,  of  active  habits,  rich  and  will 
indulge  in  sexual  pleasures. 

A  person  born  when  the  Muon  pusses  through  the 
asterism  of  Arden  will,  be  insincere,  of  irascible  temper, 
ungrateful,  troublesome  aud  addicted  to  wicked  deeds. 

4,  A  person  bora  when  tho  Moon  pusses  through  cho 
Asterisiu  of  Punurvasu  will  be  devout  and  of  patient  habits, 


(a)  This  chav  tor  appears  as  Chajiter  X  V  I  of  Brihat  Jutaka. 


F.RIHAT  BAJtHITA, 


VTtJHAT  SAM.H1TA,  [CK-  t>4 

will  live  in  comfort,  will  be  good  n  at  a  red,  <\  n  iet, '  o  i  wrong 
views,  sickly,  thirsty  and  pleased  with  trifles. 

5,  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  tho 
ns  tori  am  of  Pushya  will  have  a  control  over  his  passions, 
will  be  generally  liked,  will  be  lea-rued  in  the  SastraS,  will 
bo  rich  and  will  bo  fond  of  doing  acts  of  charity. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterisin  of  Aslosha  will  not  be  attentive  to  tho  work  of 
other  men,  will  be  a  promiscuous  eater  will  be  sinful, 
ungrateful  and  skilled  in  deceiving  other  men. 

6.  A  person  bom  when  the  Mooujjpasses  through  tho 
aster  ism  of  Magha  will  have  numerous  servants,  will  wor¬ 
ship  the  Devast  and  the  pitris,  aud  will  be  engaged  in 
important  works. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  tho 
aaberima  of  P.  Phalguni  will  be  of  sweet  speech,  will  be 
liberal  i  i  his  gifts,  will  be  of  wandering  Jrsbits  and  will 
serve  under  kings. 

7-  A.  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  0.  Phalguni  will  be  generally  liked,  will  earn 
money  by  his  learning  and  will  live  in  comfort  and  luxury. 


A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
as  ter  ism  of  Haste  will  bo  of  active  habits,  fall  of  resources, 
shameless,  merciless,  a  thief  and  a  drunkard. 

8.  A  person  bom  when  the  Moon  passes’ through  the 
asterism  of  Ohitra  will  wear  clothes  of  various  colors,  and 
flowers  and  will  be  of  beautiful  eyes  and  limbs. 


A  person  born  whon  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Swati  will  be  of  a  mild  and  quiet  'nature,  wilt 
control  his  passions  and  desires,  will  bo  skilled  in  trade  and 
merciful,  will  be  unable  to  boar  thirst,  will  be  of  sweet 
speech  and  wilhbo  disposedto  do  acts  of  charity. 


9.  A  person  born,  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
aster  ism  of  Vi  salt  hft  will  bo  jealous  oi:  another's  prosperity, 
will  bo  a  niggard,  will  be  oi  bright  appearance  and  of 
distinct  speech,  will  bo  skilled  in  the  art  ot  earning  money, 
will  be  disposed  to  bring  about  enmity  between  persons. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
listeriam  of  Anuradlm  will  be  rich,  will  live  in  foreign 
lands,  will  bo  unable  to  bear  hunger  and  will  be  inclined  to 
move  from  place  to  place. 

10.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
astorism  of  Jyeahta  will  have  very  few  friends,  will  bo 
cheerful,  virtuous  and  of  irascible  temper. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
ns  ter  ism  of  Moola  will  be  haughty,  rich,  happy,  nob  dis¬ 
posed  to  injure  other  men ,  of  firm  views  and  will  live  in 
luxury. 

11.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  tho 
aaterisrn  of  P  Asbadba  will  have  an  agreeable  wife,  will  bo 
proud  and  will  bo  attached  to  friends. 

A  person  bom  when  tho  Moon  passes  through  tho 
asberism  of  TX  Ashadha  will  be  obedient,  will  be  learned  iu 
the  roles  of  virtue,  will  possess  many  friends,  wiil  he  grate¬ 
ful,  will  return  favors  received  and  will  bo  generally  liked. 

12.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through 
tho  asterism  of  Sravana  will  be  prosperous  and  learned, 
will  have  a  liberal  minded  wifo,  will  bo  rich  and  of  wide¬ 
spread  fume. 

A  person  born  wheu  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as¬ 
terism  of  Dhanishta  will  be  liberal  in  his  gifts,  will  be 
rich,  valient,  will  be  fond  of  music  and  will  be  a  niggand. 

IS.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  tho 
asterism  of  Satabhishak  will  be  harsh  in  his  speech,  will  be 
truthful,  will  suffer  grief,  will  conquer  his  enemies,  will 


.  55 


5^>  ■ f  '  ■  1  '  p  ;  ; 

fit;.-  ' ,  '  •  ,  •"  :M  %■,'  .4  $4  Im-W 

Jp.  BKIHAT  SAMH1M.  f 

thoughtlessly  engage  in  works  and  will  by  of  independent 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terisih  of  P.  Bhadrapada  will  suffer  from  grief,  will  place 
Ins  wealth  at  the  disritm!  of  his  wife,  will,  be  of  distinct 
speech,  will  be  skilled  in  earning  money  and  will  be  a 
niggard. 

14.  A  parson  bora  wheu  the  Moon  passes!  through 
the  asterism  of  IJ.  lluadrapada  wifi  be  au  able  speaker,  will 
bo  happy,  wilt  possess  children  and  grand-children,  will  con¬ 
quer  his  enemies  and  will  bo  virtuous. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
leristu  of  Bovatt  will  possess  perfect  limbs,  will  be  of  amia¬ 
ble  manners,  will  be  deeply  learned,  will  never  covet  the 
property  of  other  persons  and  will  bo  rich. 

Notes : — The  effects  described  in  this  Chapter  will 
hj  come  to  pass  if  the  Moon  be  powerful. 


CHAPTER  LV,  (102).  - 

Ox  The  Division  Of  The  Zodiac. 

1.  Sign  Aries  -  consists  of  the  asterisms  of  Aswioi, 
and  Bharuni  and  the  first  quarter  of  Krittika.  Sign  Thorns 
consists  of  the  last  three  quarters  of  Krittika,  the  asterism 
of  Robin.'  uud  tho  first  two  quarters  of  Mrigusirsba. 

2.  Sign  Gemini  consists  of  the  last  two  quarters  of 
Mrigasirsha,  tho  asterism  of  Ardra  and  the  first  three  quar¬ 
ters  of  Punarvasu.  Sign  Cancer  consists  of  the  last  quar¬ 
ter  of  Punarvasu  and  the  astedsms  of  Pushya  and 
Asleshn. 

3.  Sign  Leo  consists  of  the  asterisms  of  Magha  and 
P  Phalgard,  and  the  first  quarter  of  U.  Phalgnni.  Sign  Virgo 
consists  of  the  last  three  quarters  of  U.  Pbalguui,  tho  as- 

teristn  of  Hasta,  and  the  first  two  quarters  of  Chifera. 


BRTHA1  SAMIIITA 


289 


4.  Sign  Libra  consists  of  five  last  two  quarters  of 
Cliifcra/fcho  asterjam  of  Swati,and  the  first  three  quarters  of 
Visaklm.  Sign  Scorpio  consists  of  the  last  quarter  of  Visa- 
k ha  and  the  astevisnas  of  Anuradha  ami  Jyeahfa. 

•>  Sign  Segi  ttan  consists  of  the  asterkma  of  Mu  la 
and  P.  Ajshadha  and  the  first  quarter  U •  Asbadlia.  Sign 
Capricorn  consists  of  the  last  three  quarters  of  Lr.  Ashadha 
the  a^torism  of  Srayana  and  the  first  two  quarters  of  ora- 
vishta. 

6.  Sign  Aquarius  consists  of  the  last  two  quarters 
of  ^ravish ta,  tho  a  see  risen  of  Satabhishak,  and  tho  first 
three  quarters  of  JR  Bhadrapada.  Sign  Pisces  consists  of 
tho  last  quarter  of  R  Bhadrupada  and  thru  asterisks  of  U. 
i  > ha <. i  ra  pa d a  a  ml  « li  e  vat  i . 

7.  Signs  Aries,  Leo,  and  Sagittari  begin  res¬ 
pectively  v/ith  bhoastevisms  of  Aswini,  Magaba  and  Mnla 
am.  the  several  signs  end  with  the  fiirrfc,  second,  third  of 
fourth  quarters  of  tho  odd  asterisma  succeeding  the  said 
three  astcrisms. 


CHAPTER  LYr  (103). 

On  Mariiuges. 

L  if  at  the  time  of  marriage  the  rising  sign  be  occu¬ 
pied  by  tho  Sup  or  Mars,  the  woman  will,  become  a  widow  ; 
it  it  be  occupied  by  liuhu,  tho  sou  wii!  die  if  by  Saturn 
there  will  be  poverty;  if  by  Venus,  Mercury  or  Jupiter, 
tho  woman  will  remain  chaste;  and  if  by  the  Moon,  the 
woman  will  die  early. 

2.  l..f  at  tho  time  of  marriage,  the  2nd  house  from  tho 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  tho  Suu,  Saturn,  Rahu  or  Mars 
the  ■re  will  be  much  suffering  from  poverty  \  if  it  be  occu¬ 
pied  by  Jupiter,  Venus  or  Mercury  tho  woman  will  become 
rich  and  will  not  become  a  widow  and  if  the  2nd  house  be 
occupied  by  the  Moon,  she  will  get  many  sons. 


SiW  hat  samhita  [cn.  56. 

■*r '/£ J  V  ■.  film » ; '•*>. .  !■  vw^mM  wt  (V  ;.V 

H  at  the  ti mo  of  Marriage,  the  3rd  house  from  tho 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  Mara,  Jupiter, 
Venus  or  Mercury  the  woman  will  have  many  sons  and  will 
become  rich ;  if  the  3rd  house  be  occupied  by  Saturn,  the 
woman  will  be  liked  by  all.  ml  if  it  be  occupied  by  Rahu, 

she  will  die  earlv, 

¥ 

b  ll  at  the  time  of  marriage,  the  4th  house  from  the 
ascendant  bo  occupied  by  Saturn,  the  woman  will  not  have 
much  milk;  if  it.  be  occupied  by  the  Sun  and  Moon,  the 
woman  will  not  be  generally  liked ;  if  it  bo  occupied  by 
Rahu,  hei  husband  will  have  another  wife  ,  if  it  be  occupied 
by  Mars  .she  wdl  have  very  little  wealth;  and.  if  it  bo  occu-. 
piod  by  V enusy Jupiter  or  Meteury,  the  woman  will  be  happy 


5.  ll  at  the  time  of  Marriage  tho  f>fch  house  from  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  Mars  there  will  bo 
death  of  sons  ;  if  it  bo  occupied  by  Jupiter,  Venus  or  Mer¬ 
cury,  the  woman  will  get  many  sons;  if  by  Rahu,  she  will 
dh  early,  if  by  Saturn  she  will  he  afflick  d  with  serious  di¬ 
seases  ;  and  it  it  be  occupied  by  tho  Moon  sho  will  get 
daughters. 


ff  at  the  time  of  Marriage,  the  6th  liouso  from  tho 
asoeudant  be  occupied  by  Saturn,  tho  Sun,  Rahu,  Jupiter  or 
Mars,  the  woinau  will  be  liked  by  ail  for  her  good  nature 
and  she  wilt  shew  due  respect  to  her  father-in-law  and 
others ;  if  it  be  occupied  by  tho  Moon,  she  will  become  a 
widow  ;  if  by  Venus,  sho  will  become  poor  ,  and  if  by  Mer¬ 
cury  she  will  become  prosperous  and  quarrolsone. 


7.  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage,  the  7fch  house  from  tho 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  Saturn,  the  woman  will  become  a 
w  idow ;  if  it  be  occupied  bjT  Mars,  she  will  suffer  imprison¬ 
ment  ;  it  by  Jupiter;. she  will  suffer  from  torture;  if  by  Mer¬ 
cury  she  will  suffer  miseries ;  if  by  Rahu,  she  will  suffer  loss 
ot  wealth ;  if  by  the  Sun  she  will  suffer  from  diseases  ,  if  by 


liRIEAT  fiAMEITA, 

the  Moon,  she  will  travel  to  foreign  lands  and  if  by  Venus, 
die  will  die  early. 

8,  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage,  fclio  8  th  house  from  .‘.bo 
ascendant  bo  occupied  by  Jupiter  or  Mercury,  there  win  oe 
separation  between  lmsbaud  and  wife ;  if  it  bo -occupied  by 
the  Moon,  Venus  or  Itahu  the  woman  will  die  early  ;  vf  by 
the  Sun  she  will  escape  widowhoods  if  by  Mars  she  will  In 
afflicted  with,  diseases  ;  and  if  by  Saturn  she  will  become  rich 
cud  will  bo  liked  by  her  husband- 

lb  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage  the  9th  house  from  the 
ascen  haul  be  occupied  by  Venus,  the  Snn,  Mars  or  Jupiter, 
the  woman  will  l>e  charitable  ;  if  it  be  occupied  by  Mercury 
she  will  bo  free  from  diseases  5  if  by  Raliu  or  Saturn  sh  will 
bo  barren  ;  and  if  by  the  Moon,  she  will  boar  daughLc-  aud 
will  be  of  h  wandering  nature, 

ft).  If  at  the  time  of  Marriage,  the  10th  house  from 
(ho  a.'Cendsnb  be  occupied  by  Ita.hu,  the  woman  will  Ik-coiuo 
a  widow  ;  if  it  be  occupied  by  Saturn  and  the  -Sun,  she  will 
bo  inclined  towards  sinful  deeds;  if  by  Mara,  she  will  die 
early  ;ifby  the  Moon,  she  wil  become  poor  and  unchn  .fe, 
aud  if  by  any  of  the  other  placets  she  will  be  rich  and  liked 
by  all. 

11.  If  at  the  time  of  Murage  the  11  th  house  fr  mi  the 
ascendant,  be  occupied  by  the  Sun,  the  woman  will  get  many 
sons;  if  it  bo  occupied  by  the  Moon,  she  will* become  rich; 
if  by  Mars,  she  will  got  sons  ;  if  by  Saturn,  sho  will  become 
very  Wealthy  ;  if  by  Jupiter,  she  will ‘be  of  lung  life;  if  by 
Mercury,  she  will  [iye  in  plenty  ;  if  by  Ila’nu  she  will  die 
before  her  husband  aud  if  by  Venus  she  will  be  com  v.eal- 

. 

12,  If  at  the  time  of  marriage  the  12th  hou-e  fV-  in  the 
ascendant  be  occupied  by  3 npiter,  the  woman  will  become 
rich  ;  if  it  bo  ccmpied  by  the  Sun,  she  will  becom :  poor  , 

111 


BRTHAT  8  MU  ETITA. 


[eir,  53- 


if  by  the  Moon,  alio  wifi  lone  her  wraith  ;  if  by  Baho,  sbo 
will  become  unchaste  ;  if  by  Verms,  sho  will  bo  chaste;  if 
by  Mercury  she  will  got  many  sons  and  grand-sons  and 
if  by  Saturn  or  Mara,  she  will  bo  fond  of  liquor, 

13.  The  most  excel! out  h  ur  for  marriage  is  the  hour 
in  the  evening  when  cows  are  being  driven  home,  and  the 
sky  is  covered  with  duct  raised  by  their  hoofs  striking 
against  the  ground  while  running.  The  married  woman 
will  get  wealth,  health  and  sons  and  will  be  prosperous. 
This  hour  is  known  ns  (Jodhuii  Lagna.  In  the  case  of  such 
hour,  the  character  of  the  Nakshatra,  the  Tithi,  the  To  go, 
the  Karana,  or  the  Lagna  need  not  be  considered.  Shell 
an  hour  will  make  a  poi  son  happy  and  prosperous. 


CHAPTER  LVII  (101). 


On  The  Effects  of  Planetary  motions. 

1.  The  truths  of  Science  have  for  a  long  time  remained 
seal  tercel  for  want  of  arrangement.  They  will  become  lib 
for  ready  use  if  arranged  and  systematised. 

'3-  The  influence  exercised  by  the  planets  over  human 
affairs  as  they  move  through  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  is 
various.  I  desire  to  describe  their  effects  iu  stanzas  written 
in  a  variety  of  metres  and  the  learned  are  requested  to 
excuse  this  wish  in  me.  (a). 


Notes. 

(a).  Each  stania  of  this  Chapter  is  written  in  a  dis¬ 
tinct  metre  and  contains  the  name  of  the  metre  also.  On 
account  of  this  restriction  the  ideas  oxpressd  in  many 
stanzas  are  curious  and  far  fetched. 

3.  One  who  hat;  read  the  works  of  Mandavya  on  the 
present  subject  will  not  like  my  treatise,  and  if  he  likes  it 
at  all,  he  will  like  it  in  just  the  same  way  as  a  person  will 
like  his  wife  whom  ho  knows  to  be  unchaste. 


'Notes- 


This  stanza  is  written  in  the  Jaghanachapala  moire 
which  term  also  means  a  harlot. 

4.  When  the  San  passes  through  the  0th,  3rd  and  1.0th 
signs  from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of 
birth  of  a  person  (a)  the  effects  will  bo  benefio  ;  when  the 
Moon  passes  though  the  3rd,  0fcb,  10th,  Vth,  and  1st  togas 
from  the  Moon,  the  effects  will -also  bo  benefic;  when  Jupiter 
passes  through  the  7th,  9th,  2nd  and  5th  sign ;  or  when 
Mars  and  Saturn  pass  through  the  6th  and  3rd  signs  or  when 
Mercury  passes  through  the  6th,  2nd0  4th,  lOfch  nun  8th 
signs  from  the  Moon  the  effects  wiU  be  benelic.  But  when 

o 

Vepus  pusses  through  the  7th,  6th  and  lOfch  signs  from  the 
Moon  the  effects  will  be  maletie-  All  the  planets  produce 
benelic  effects  whoa  they  puss  through  the  Hth  house  from 
the  Moon. 

5.  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  sign  occupied  by 
the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  such  person 
will  suffer  from  fatigue,  from  loss  of  wealth,  chest-pain 
and  foot  journey.  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  2nd 
house  from  the  Moon  the  person  will  suffer  from  loss  of 
wealth,  discomfort,  eye-diseases  and  deceit.  When  the  Hun 
passes  through  the  3rd  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person 
will  return  to  his  place,  vyill  become  rich,  happy  and  free 
from  diseases  and  will  destroy  his  enemies-  When  the 
Bun  passes  through  the  4ih  house  from  the  Moon,  the 
person  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  will  bo  hindered  from 
enjoying  the  company  of  an  excellent  wifoi 

.6  When  the  Bun  passes  through  the  5th  bouse  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  from 
enemies.  When  the  Sun  passes  through  the  6fch  house, 

(,t),  Xu  future  wo  shall  only  employ  the  expression  44  froui  tfc» 
Moon  to  denote  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  ol  a 
person. 


Wm--  %i 4.;..  ;pf| 

fc,|lw^p1 

BRUT  AT  SAM  MIT  A  2 

)"*’  .)  person  will  bo  freed  from  diseases,  from  enemies  and 
itom  grief.  W  hen  the  Sun  passes  through  the  7th  house 
the  person  will  sutler  from  the  fatignes  of  foot-joui  ncy  , 
from  chest-pain,  iroin  humility  and  consumption.  When 
tin  Sun  passes  through  the  8th  house  form  the  Moon,  the 
person  ’s  own  beautiful  wife  will  not  bo  of  use-  to  him. 

< .  vVh4n  the  Sun  passes  through  the  9fch  house  from 
too  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  .  ooidonts,  humility, 
(IhiOasos,  mental  pains  and  opposition.  When  the  Sun  pas¬ 
ses  through  the  10th  hau  te  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will 
i.ehie/e  great  .success  and  will  gain  his  object.  When  the 
Suu  passes  thrdugh  the  flth  house,  tho  person  will  achieve 
su ‘ee.s.ss,  will  return  toll' is  place,  will  be  respected,  will  be¬ 
come  prosperous  and  will  be  freed  from  diseases.  When 
the  Bun  passes  through  t  he  12th  house,  tho  person  will  gain 
hie  object  only  by  the  adoption  of  just  and  proper  means 
and  not  otherwise* 


8.  When  the  Moon  passes  through  tho  sign  occupied 
by  herself  at  tho  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  such  person  will 
got  meals,  excellent  bed  and  clothes*  When  the  Moon 
passes  through  tho  2ud  house,  the  person  will  suffer  loss 
ot  respectability  and  of  v.odth  >n  i  will  als  »  suffer  from  obs¬ 
tacles  When  the  Moon  passes  through  tho  Sr  i  house,  tho 
parson  will  got  clothes,  women,  and  wealth  iu  abundance. 
When  the  Moon  passes  through  the  4th  house,  tho  person 
will  have  no  liking  for  mountains  and  will  ba  os  cruel  as 
a  seme  et,. 


0.  When  tho  Moon  passes  through  the  5th  house 
from  the  sign  occupied  by  herself  at  tho  time  of  birth  of.  a 
person,  such  person  will  suffer  from  humility,  diseases,  pain 
<  f  mind  and  obstacles  in  his  path.  When  the  Moon  passes 
though  tho  O'fch  house,  the  person  will  enjoy  wealth,  comfort 
and  the  ruin  of  his  enemies  and  will  bo  froed  from  diseases. 
Waeu  the  Moon  passes  through  the  7th  house,  tho  person 


will  enjoy  a  carringo,  respectability,  a  good  bed,  good  n  r ’ala 
and  w  Oil  1  fcli-  When  the  Moon  pass  os  through  the  8th  house 
the  person  will  live  in  fear*  of  evils. 


10.  When  tho  Moon  passes  through  the  9th  house 
from  the  sigh  occupied  by  horsolf  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a 
person,  such  person  will  sudor  from  imprisonment,  pain  of 
mind,  fatiiruo  of  bodv  and  chest-pain.  When  tho -Moon 
passes  through  tho  1 0  th  house,  tho  person’s  orders  will  bo 
cavil  d  out  and  ho  will  sm cooed  in  his  work.  When  the  Moon 
passes  through  the  lit h  house,  the  person  will  enjoy  pros¬ 
perity,  will  got  new  friends  and  wealth.  Whoa  tho  .Morin 
passes  through  the  12th  house,  lio  will  suffer  from  injuries 
received  from  a  bullock. 


11. 

Whoa  Mars  pa; 

S  O  iil 

i  thr 

'OU 

gh 

the 

sign  oc< 

On  pi 

ed  by 

the  li 

looi 

ii  at  "tiiO  fcuu  o  ol  1 

)b|! 

hi  o  f  i 

&  1 

)0  T; 

son, 

such,  |  m 

>l'SO 

a  will 

suffer 

1  from  troubles.  Wh 

cu 

Mai 

s 

■pai 

J: 

9803  i 

in' 

;  th 

e  2nd 

house 

>  fr 

oiix  fclio  Moon,  ilu: 

>  jpf 

n'Sogi 

\v 

ill 

s  n  fFe 

r  from 

the 

1-  in 

from 

qu 

a r rc I 3 ,  from  ■<? n o n 

(103 

and 

f 

ran 

.1  dis 

gi  ace. 

Hj 

3  wi  l  l 

also  s 

•  ufi'i 

jv  from  bilious  and 

win 

% 

Oi 

U  Ill  p  1 

aiufcs 

and 

from 

th  lev 

OS, 

j 

:> 

When  Mari  passe 

s  tl 

i  rou , 

jh 

thi 

3  3rc 

l  homo 

fro 

rn  tho 

M  OOp 

there  will  be  gain  o 

if  ) 

;s 

ire 

nn  v 

obbers 

and 

fro  m 

child  i 

en 

the  person  will  1 

100' 

>uio 

of 

br 

ight 

appeal 

ranc 

:Oj  li  13 

order 

a  will  be  carried  into 

~iv 

on 

$4  l 

iV ' 

;x:o 

will  g 

et  wea 

Ith, 

blan- 

bets, 

metals,  gems  and  tho  iil 

IkO* 

13,  When  Mars  passes  though  the  4-th  house  from  tho 
Mooib  tho  person  will  suffer  from  fever,  belly-ache  and  'blood 
(liseharg.  a  and  ho  will  also  suffer  miseries  through  associa¬ 
tion  with  wicked  men. 

14  When  Mars  passes  through  the  5th  house  from  the 
Moon,  tho  person  will  sutler  from  enemies,  diseases,  fen'3 
and  troublesome  children  and  his  appearance  will  become 
less  bright. 


JIM  HAT  SAMiriTA 


238 


When  Slurs  passes  through  the  CtU  house  from 
tlnv  Moon,  tho’pomn  will  be  freed  from  .enemies  and  quar¬ 
rels  ;  ho  wilLobtain.  gold,  corals  auu  copper  and  will  lead 
an  independent  life- 

]C.  When’Mars  pass  t  through  tho  7th  house  from  the 
Moon,  tho  person  will  suffer  from  a  quarrelsome  wife,  from 
diseases  of  the  eye  and  from  belly-ache.  When  he  passes 
through  the  8th  house,  there  will  be  bloodshed,  loss  of  wealth 
and  of  respectability ;  aiid  when  he  passes  through  the  9th 
house,  tho  person  will  suffer  disgrace  and  loss  of  wealth  arid 
the  like  ;  his  gait  will  bo  slow  and  he  will  become  weak- 

17.  When  Mara  passes  through  tho  10th  house  from 
tho  Moon,  the  poison  will  obtain  much  wealth  and  when  ho 
passes  through  tho  11th  house,  ho  will  obtain  success  and 
renown  and  will  rule  over  a  province. 

IS.  When  Mara  passes  through  the  l2tk  house  from 
the  Moon,  tho  person,  will  suffer  from  various  expenses, 
troubles,  d  iseases  of  the  oye,  from  au  angry  wife  and  fiom 
bilious  complaints  though  he  may  be  bora  in  the  family  of 
Indra. 

10-  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  sign  occupied 
by  tho  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  person,  such  person 
will  suffer  loss  of  wealth  caused  byt.be  advice  of  wicked 
men, by  talebearers,  by  imprisonment  and  quarrels-  ire 
writ  besides  receive  disagreeable  intelligence  when  in  his 


journey. 

20.  When  Mercury  passes  through  tho  2nd  house 
from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  sutler  disgrace  and  gain 
success  and  wealth.  When  bo  passes  through  the  ord  house 
the  person  will  got  friends  and  will  bo  afraid  of  trouble8 
from  the  king  and  from  his  enemies  and  ho  will  quit  his 
place  from  his  own  wicked  deeds. 

21-  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  4th  house 
from  the  Moon  a  person’s  knismou  and  family  will  increase 


iiKIHAT  SAMttfTA 


ami  tli c vc  will  be  much  gain.  When  Mercury  passes  through 
the  Sth  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  quarrel  with 
his  wife  and  sons  and  will,  not  enjoy  the  company  of  an  ex¬ 
cellent  wife* 

22,  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  Oth  house 
from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  bo  liked  by  all  and  will  gain 
renown.  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  7 lh  house  the 
person’s  appearanoo  will  become  less  bright:  and  there  will 
be  quarrels-  When. Mercury  passess,  through  the  tfth  house' 
the  person  will  get  sons,  success,  cloths  and  wealth  and  will 
become  happy  and  powerful. 

2*3  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  9 lb’ house  -from 
Moon  the  person  will  meet  with  obstacles  to  his  work. 
When  Mercury  passes  through  the  10th  house  from  the 
Moon  the  person's  enemies  will  meet  with  ruin  and  the  per¬ 
son  will  got  wealth,  will  enjoy  the  company  of  bis  wifo  and 
will  bo  dressed  in  flannel. 

24*  When  Mercury  passes  through  the  11th  house 
from  the  Moon  the  person  will  got  wealth,  comfort,  sons, 
women,  friends  and  conveyance,  will  bo  happy  and  will 
receive  good  intelligence.  When  Mercury  passes  through 
the  12 tlx  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  disgrace 
from  hiS  enemies,  null  suffer  from  diseases  and  w  ill  not 
enjoy  the  company  of  a  good  wife. 

25.  W  hen  Jupiter  passes  through  the  sign  occupied 
by  the  Mor  n  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  such  person 
will  lose  his  wealth  and  intelligence,  will  quit  his  place  and 
AVi  11  suffer  from  many  quarrels.  When  Jupiter  passes 
through  the  2nd  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  have 
no  enemies  and  will  enjoy  wealth  and  women. 

2d*  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  3rd  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  quit  his  place  and  will  meet,  with 
obstacles  in  his  work-  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  4th 


BIUHAT  SAMHITA 


4si 


.  house  from  tbo  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  from  troubles 
caused  by  his  kinsmen,  will  become  patient  and  resigned 
-itid  will  delight  in  nothing. 

17-  When  Jupiter  passes  t broach  the  5th  house  from 


M$L 

P'v 

te, 


. 

pv 

ttfcV  v-y^V  o':  ;■<;■ 

.  ■ . ’  ,1  .  ,,  ...  .  •  >  --  ,I.4 

the  Moon,  the  ; .orsou  will  get  servants,  prosperity,  sons, 
elephants,  horses,  bullocks,  gold,  towns,  houses,  women. 


O0Vi«'O  « 

wmkzkt 

lifp 

PIP* 


cloths,  gems  and  good  qualities. 

2S.  When.  Ju  pi  tor  passee  through  the  6th.  hotiso  from 
tbo  Moon,  tile  person  will  bo  so  much  afflicted  at  heart  that' 
ho  will  cako.no.  delight  ui  the  agreeablo  faces  of.  beautiful 
women,  in  tho  music  of  the  peacock  and  the  cuckoo  and  in 
houses  made  pleasant  by  the  frolic  of  children  playing  like 
tho  young  of  the  deer. 

20.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  7th  house  from 
tho  Moon,  the  person  will  enjoy  a  good  bod,  the  company  of 
an  excellent  woman,  wealth,  good  meals,  flowers,  convey* 
iVuc©  and  the  like  and  ho  will  bo  ol  good  speech  and  intelli¬ 
gence. 


SO-  When 

>Tu| 

pifcer  p 

ass  os 

f b rou; 

?h  th 

e 

8th  h 

OH  50 

from 

the 

Moon,  the  pe 

mo 

ii  wiii  g 

lullor  i 

rom  i  i 

dxwis 

01 

imotil 

heu 

vy  grief,  tin 

>  fr 

• 

ox  jo 

urn# 

an  cl 

seriov 

IS  ilh 

rj'px^o. 

Wb 

&n  Jupiter  pt 

iS  fcbroi 

igli  tb 

o  9  th 

llOUS 

0 

from 

the  | 

fOv)U 

the 

person  will  b 

ecu: 

EUO  Omi 

lient  n 

„fc  wor 

k  am 

a 

influe 

•utial 

.  and 

he  \ 

vill  get  sons, 

SU( 

:ce&y  h 

i  wort 

r,  a vc a 

1th  &] 

lid 

1  g  rut 

n- 

31.  When 

Jar 

•ifcer  pa 

WOS  til 

irougl 

x  t h  o 

1 

Oth  h 

OUfltl 

from 

the 

Moon,  the  rc 

;W0 

n  will 

quit  3 

lace,  a 

( \ ' 

d  suff 

q  r  ]  <  \ 

■Stf  of 

health  and  wealth.  When  Jui 


passes  thro ufirb  the  llth 


hoy 

use,  tho  p 

Gl'BOlt  VPl! 

i  ret  ti  m  1 

lio  h 

is  conn 

?  ry  and 

will  rr 

■ 

health  ai 

id  wealth 

i.  Wher 

t  Ji 

i  pi  lor 

passes  t 

lirougi 

,  tho 

1  7'  f. 

.  J,  M  ii 

h  house, 

the  persoi 

a  will  Kttf 

tor 

grief  ir 

i  hiswti 

j  m  joii 

trhoy.« 

32.  W 

Ivon  Yen; 

IS  p<iftSGS 

tin 

■ough  tl 

iio  $iga 

occupi 

ed  by 

tliO 

Mooa  a 

t  the  tim 

0  or  ou  t 

ii 

of  a  p< 

3VS0IU  ft 

ucl  p 

■arson 

wil 

I  enjoy  e: 

reellenb  p 

0jl  i  urn  *tiy 

f  j.o 

>  wem. 

cloths, 

liOUo  v< 

hbed. 

RRIffAT  SAMfTTTA 


RRIHAT  SAM  HIT  A  [CH.  57. 

nujals  and  women.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  2nd 
house  from  the  Mom,  the  person  will  get  eons,  wealth, 
grain  and  presents  from  the  king;  will  have  a  prosperous 
family,  will  enjoy  flowers  and  gems  and  will  bo  of  bright 
appearance- 

34.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  3rd  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  become  influential,  wealthy  and 
respectable  and  will  return  to  his  place  and  will  get  cloths. 
Mis  enemies  will  meet  with  ruin.  When  Venus  passes 
through  the 4th  house,  the  person  will  get  friends  aud  will 
become  greatly  powerful. 


<SL 


o-o.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  5th  house,  (he 
f»  rson  will  become  happy,  will  get  kinsmen,  sons,  wealth 
and  friends  and  will  not  suffer  defeat  by  the  enem  y. 

36.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  6th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  disgrace,  will  bo  afflicted 
with  diseases  and  will  be  exposed  to  danger.  When  Venus 
passes  through  the  7th  house  the  person  will  suffer  injuries 
through  women.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  8th 
house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  get  houses,  articles 
of  luxury  arid  beautiful  women. 


37 ‘  VVhcn  Venus  passes  through  the  Pth  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  become  virtuous,  happy  and 
wealthy,  and  ho  will  get  plenty  of  cloths.  When  Venus 
passes  through  the  10th  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person 
wdl  suffer  disgrace  aud  will  also  suffer  from  quarrels. 

38.  When  Venus  passes  through  the  1 1  th  house  from 
tee  Moon,  the  person  will  get  the  wealth  of  his  friends  and 
will  also  gee  perfumes  and  cloths.  When  Venus  passes 
through  the  12th  house  the  person  will  get  very  few  cloths. 

.  J9',  Whe°  Saturn  Passes  through  the  sign  occupied 

■0  die  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  such  person 

W,U  8ufFep  fvom  P°isou  fire,  will  quit  his  kinsmen , 


BtUHAT  saMHITA 


2&0 


•1 

wiil  sutler  imprisonment  and  torture,  will  travel  to  foreign 
lands  and  live  with  his  friends  there  ;  will  suffer  miseries, 
Joss  of  wealth  and  of  sons,  will  suffer  also  from  the  fatigues 
of  foot-journey  ami  from  humiliation. 

40.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  2nd  house  from, 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  suffer  loss  of  beauty  and  comfort, 
will  become  weak  and  will  get  wealth  from  other  men  aud 

v  di* . 

he  will  wot  en  joy  this  wealth  long. 

41.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  3rd  house  from 
the  M  don,  the  person  will  get  wealth,  servants,  articles  of 
enjoyinSht,  camels,  buffaloes,  horses,  elephants,  asses  and 
houses.  Ho  will  become  influential,  happy,  free  from 
diseases  and  will  become  greatly  powerful  uud  will  defeat 
his  enemies  in  fight. 


42.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  4th  house  from 
the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  separated  from  His  friends, 
wealth  and  wife  aud  ever  suspecting  evil  in  everything  will 
never  feel  happy. 

43.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  5th  house  from 
tin*  Moon,  the  person  will  bo  separated  from  his  sons  and 
wealth  and  will  suffer  from  quarrels.  When  Saturn  passes 
through  the  0th  house  from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  be 
freed  from  his  enemies  and  diseases  and  will  enjoy  the 
company  of  women. 

44.  When  Saturn  passes  through  the  7th  or  8th  house 
from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  separated  from  his  wife 
and  sons  and  will  travej  on  foot  in  a  pitiablo  condition. 
When  he  passes  through  the  0th  house,  the  person  will  be 
all  that  was  stated  for  8a turn  passing  through  the  8th  house 
and  will  besides  suffer  from  hatred,  chest-pain,  imprison¬ 
ment  and  in  consequence  will  not  properly  observe  the 
daily  duties. 


45.  Wl  oq  Saturn  passes  through  t,ue  AUfch  house,  the 
person  will  get  work  and  will  suffer  loss  of  wealth,  learning 
and  fame.  When  Saturn  passoa  through  the  11th  house 
from  the  Moon,  the  person  will  become  cruel  and  wilt  get 
women  and  wealth.  Whan  Saturn  passes  through  the  12th 
house  from  the  Moon  the  person  will  suffer  much  grief. 

46.  Though  a  planet  might  bo  benefic  fee*  h  person,  ho 

nroduces  benefic  effects  only  according  to  ti^dptf’tre  of  the 
Dasa  periods  and  the  rank  of  the  person  in  life,  f  ist  m  tjhe 
ssvrae  way  as  the  quantity  of  rain  falling  into  &  .cup 

cannot  hut  be  small  though  the  rath  he  excessive®^ 

47.  The  Sun  and  Mars  ‘•ball  be  worshipped  with  ro  » 
fto-  era*  sandal  paste,  the  Vaku'la  flower  (the  fragrant  flow  or 
of  Mirnusops  Eleugi),  gift,  of  copper,  gold  and  oxen  to 
Brahmins.  The  Moon  shall  be  worshipped  by  the  gift  of  a 
white  cow.  Venus  shall 'be  worshipped  with  white  dowers 
and  by  the  gift  of  silver,  and  sweet  and  r  tr  it  ions  things. 
Saturn  shall  be  worshipped  by  the  gift  of  alack  substances. 
Mercury  shall  bo  worshipped  by  the  gift,  of  gems,  silver  and 
with  the  Tilaka  flower.  Jupiter  shall  be  worshipped  with 
yellow  flower  and  by  the  gift  of  yellow  substances.  By  the 
worship  of  the  planets,  a  person  escapes  nil  miseries. 

48.  Evils  indicated  by  the  motion  of  the  planets  may 
be  escaped  by  the  worship  of  the  Brahmins  arid:  (*io  Devas, 
by  expiatory  ceremonies,  by  the  recitation  of  mantras  and 
sacred  texts,  by  the  practice  of  austerities,  by  gifts  to 
Brahmins,  by  the  subjugation  of  one’s  passions,  by  moving 
in  the  company  of  Sadhus,  and  by  conversing  with  thorn. 

40.  The  Sun  and  "  fars  produce  their  effects  when 
passing  through  the  first  half  of  a  sign;  the  Moon  and 
Saturn  produce  their  effects  when  moving  through  the  2nd 
half  of  a  sign.  The  learned  have  declared  so. 


BRIBAT  SAMHITA 


40« 


50.  Mercury  produces  his  effects  throughout  the  period 
of  his  motion  through  a  sign. 

51.  When  Jupiter  passes  through  the  middle  of  odd 
signs,  ho  produces  miseries  even  to  the  righteous  and  when 
he  passes  through  the  6th  house  ho  also  reduces  the  person 
to  a  condition  of  misery. 

52.  When  a  bene  fie  planet  is  aspected  by  a  malefic 
planet  or  when  a  malefic  planet  is  aspected  by  a  bene  fie 
planet  or  v  hen  a  ben  otic  planet  and  a  malefic  planet  occupy 
»  sign  together,  in  all  the  above  cases  the  effects  will  be  sho 

53.  The  good  effects  assigned  to  a  planet  will  fail  if 
such  planet  occupies  his  depression  sign  or  an  inimical  sign 
or  if  he  be  an  Astangata  planet  or  if  ho  he  aspected  by  au 
inimical  planet — and  a  person  can  as  little  enjoy  them  as  the 
blind  can  enjoy  the  beauties  of  a  woman. 

54-  Saturn  will  produce  effects  in  just  the  same  way 
as  the  Sun — just  as  the  Ariagiti  (metre)  follows  the  rules 
of  the  Vytali  metre  and.  the  Magndhigadha  follows  the  rules 
of  Aria, 

55-  If  Saturn  be  an  Astangata  planet  or  if  he  be 
about  to  disappear  by  conjunction  with  the  Sun  ho  will 
not  produce  miseries  to  the  righteous- 

56.  The  Moon  partakes  of  the  character  of  the  planet 
who  occupies  the  same  house  with  her — just  in  the  same 
way  as  the  face  assumes  the  character  of  the  mind. 

57-  If  the  planets  occupy  malefic  places  a-  person  will 
lose  his  importance  i.v.  become  light  just  in  the  same  way 
as  the  5th  letter  of  ail  the  four  feet  and  7th  letter  of  the 
2nd  and  4th  feet  become  short—theee  restrictions  apply  to 
the  Anushtup  metre  (in  which  this  stanza  is  written.) 

53.  Planets  occupying  benefic  places  always  produce 
good  effects. 


r'>  If  planets  do  not  occupy  benofio  places,  alljjthafe  a 
person  may  do  to  promote  his  welfare  will  only  prove 
injurious  to  him  just  in  the  same  wav  an  ti  e  ceremony  of 
exorcism  of  the  ghost  injures  a  person  when  not  properly 
conducted. 

<J0.  A  king  who  start*  on  a  journey  when  the  planets 
are  in  benefie  places  will  gain  his  object  though  he  might 
possess  little  power. 

f>l .  On  a  Sunday  and  when  the  Sua  occupies  an 
Upachaya  Sign  (the  ?rd,  fifch,  10th  and  llth  houses),  shall 
be  done  any  work  or  business  connected  with  gold,  copper, 
a  horse,  dried  sticks,  bones,  skin,  woollen  blankets,  hills, 
the  bark  of  trees,  nails,  serpents,  thieves,  weapons,  forest, 
service  under  a  tyrannical  prince,  sacred  hath,  medicino, 
white  silk,  articles  for  sale,  shepherds,  impenetrable  paths, 
cures,  stones,  works  of  an,  pure  articles, Svell- known  objects, 
valiant  fight  and  works  connected  with  fire.  The  same 
work  shall  be  done  when  the  Sun  occupies  the  rising  sign. 

On, Mondays  or  when  the  Moon  occupies  the  rising 
sign  or  when  she  occupies  one  of  the  Kendras  shall  be  done 
any  work  or  business  connected  with  jewels,  conch  shells, 
pearls,  productions  of  water,  silver,  sacrificial  rites,  sugar 
canes,  articles  of  food,  women,  rnilk,  milk-trees,  the  branches 
of  trees,  crops  of  wet  low  lands,  liquids.  Brahmins,  horses, 
tho  work  of  cooling, horned  animals,  the  cultivation  of  lands, 
i  bo  summoning  oF  a  commander  of  armies,  the  king,  popu~ 
lar  favor,  the  demons,  phlegmatic  substances,  elephants, 
flowers  and  cloths. 

On  Tuesdays  shall  be  done  any  work  or  business  con¬ 
nected  with  mineral  mines,  gold,  fire,  corals,  weapons,  theft, 
torture,  forests,  impenetrable  places,  command  over  armies, 
trees  of  reel  flowers,  all  red  substances,  bitter  substances/ 
pungent  substances,  works  of  art,  seipcnts,  ropes,  young 


BRTHAT  SAM0ITA 


IP 


57] 


mon  that,  live  by  dealing  in  these,  physician?,  Enel  hist  asce¬ 
tics,  working  by  Bight,  white  silk,  cheating  and  foppery. 

On  Wedneesdays,  andjwhen  Mercury  occupies  the  rising 
sign,,  shall  he  done  any  work  or  business  connected  with 
emeralds,  lands,  perfumes,  cloths,  plays,  knowledge  of  sci¬ 
ence,  skill  in  work  literary  performances, arts,  magical  for¬ 
mulae,  metalic  work,  law  suit,  acts  of  abTlityytrtielos  for  sale, 
practice  of  austerities  and  Yoga,  practice,  messengers,  pro¬ 
motion  of  long  life,  deceit,  lies,  bathing,  objects  either  long 
or  short,  dependence  on  other  men  for  help  and  important 
works. 

62.  On  Thursdays  shall  he  done  any  work  or  business  con¬ 
nected  with  gold,  silv  er,  horses,  elephants,  oxen,  physicians, 
medicinal  plants,  tho  Brahmins,  the  Pitris  and  the  Devas, 
umbrellas,  fans,  ornaments,  kings,  temples, alms-houses,  aus¬ 
picious  deeds,  science,  beautiful  objects,  fruitful  objects, 
truthful  words,  the  practice  of  austerities,  sacred  fire  and 
wealth . 


63.  On  Fridays  shall  be  derm  any  work  or  business 
connected  with  painting,  cloths,  spermatic  drugs,  friendship 
with  prostitutes,  buffoonery .  the  pleasures  of  the  youth 
beautiful  places,  crystals,  silver,  onj  iyinent  of  flowers,  per¬ 
fumes  and  the  like,  conveyances,  sugar  canes,  autumn  crops, 
cows,  tradesmen,  farmers,  medicine  and  the  productions  of 
water. 

On  Saturdays  shall  be  done  any  work  or  business  con  ¬ 
nected  with  a  buffalos,  a  goat,  a  camel, black  metal,  a  servant, 
an  old  man,  any  low  deeds,  a  bird,  a  thief,  ropo  works, 
wicked  persons,  pot-shreds  and  obstructions. 

64.  Thus  have  been  described  the  effects  of  the  motions 
of  the  planets  through  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  by  Varaha 
Mihira  in  a  variety  of  sweet  metres  after  examiuing  the 
science  of  prosody. 


am . , . «g§iipip» 

W.M>  ZilUHAT  H AN? HU' A  [CH.  ;,8 

CHAPTER  LVill  (105). 

On  The  Worship  Os  The  Nakshatra  Plrusha 
Or  The  Stellar  Deity- 

.  t'f  ^  1  ..." 

1.  The  asterisra  of  Mula  formsjlie  feet  of  thp  Naksha¬ 
tra  Parasha.  The  asterisms  of  Rolmri  and  ^b  win  i  form 
his  shanks  ;  those  of  P.  Asl^ha  and  U.  Ashidha  form  his 
thighs  and  those  of  P.  Phaiguni  and  U.  Phalgani  form 
the  privity. 

2.  The  asterism  of  Krutika  fgtfms  tko  lip  of  the 
Nfikshatiapurusha.  Those  of  P-JBhadrapada  andU.  Bhadra- 
pada  form  his  sides;  that  of  Revafci  forms  his  abdomen  ;  and 

that  of  Auur&dhn  forma  his  breast. 

3.3 

3.  The  nsterisrn  of  Dhanishtu  forms  the  back  ot  the 
Nakshatrapurush;^  The  asterism  of  Visakha  forma  hie 
arm# ;  that  of  Ha#ta  forum  his  hands;  that  of  Puiulirvusu 
his  lingers  and  that  of  Aslesha  his  finger  nails. 


4.  The  asterism  of  Jyesjita  forms  the  neck  of  the 
Nal^hatrapuruslm;  that  ofSravaua  forms  his  ears;  that  of 
Pusliya  his  face  ;  that  of  Strati  his  teeth  ;  that  of  Satabhi- 
shak  his  smiles;  that  of  Magna  his  nose  and  that  of  Mriga- 
sirsha  his  eyes. 


5.  The  asterism  of  Chittra  forms  the  forehead  of  tbo 
JS'aksh&trapurushh  i  that  of  Bharani  forms  his  head  and  tha’ 
of  Ardra  his  hairs.  Thus  have  been  described  the  features 
of  the  Nak  shat  rap  urusha. 

0.  A  peron  shall  worship  Vishnu  and  t.he  Kaksha- 
traporusha  on  the  8th  lunar  day  of  the  dark  half  of  the 
month  of  Chaitra  when  the  Moon  passes  through  tho  as- 
terism  of  Moolu  and  shall  fast  that  day 

7.  At  the  close  of  the  fasting,  tho  person  shall  giove 
away  to  a  Bfamiu  astronomer  a  vessel  filled  with  ghee  to¬ 
gether  with  gold,  gems  and  cloths  to  the  extent  of  his 
power. 


// 


.]  BRXHAT  SAMHlfA.  25 

A  person,  who  desires  a  bright  and  beautiful  ap¬ 
pearance,  shall  feed  Braniins  with  rice  mixed  with  milk, 
ghee  urn!  Sugar  aud  shall  fast  on  days  when  the  Moon,  pass¬ 
es  through  the  several  asterisms  representing  the  features 
of  the  Nashatrapumsha  begining  from  the  feet  and  he 

si. all  then  worship  both  Vishnu  and  the  Nakshatra- 
purusha. 

9.  A  person  who  fasts  and  worships  as  stated 
above  will  have  long  arms,  broad  and  firm  breast,  a  rnoon- 
i  ike  face,  v/hife  beautiful  teeth,  the  gait  of  an  elephant, 
eyes  long  like  the  leaves  of  the  lotus  and  appearance  cal¬ 
culated  .to  attract  the  eyes  of  women  aud  a  bod  /  as  fine  us 
that  of  cupid. 

10.  A  woman  who  fasts  and  worships  as  prescribed 
above  will  have  a  face  as  bright  and  spotless  as  the  summer 
Bun,  eyes  as  soft  and  large  os  the  petals  of  the  lotus,  beauti- 

ul  tee  to,  fine  ears,  and  hairs  as  black  us  the  bee. 

♦ 

11.  Her  voice  will  bo  sweet  as  that  of  the  cuckoo, 
her  lips  will  be  red,  her  feet  and  hands  will  be  as  soft 
and  bright  as  the  lotus,  her  waist  will  be  thin  and  bon 

with  the  weight  of  her  bosoms  and  her  navel  turning  from 
loft  to  right. 

l-<.  Her  thighs  will  bo  like  the  plantain,'  her  but¬ 
tocks  will  be  beautiful,  the  cavities  in  the  loins  above  her 
hip  will  be  fine  and  her  toes  will  bo  close. 

13.  A  person  who  observos  the  Nakshatrapuruslia 
vn'a  (ceremony)  will  after  his  death,  become  a  star  and 
along  with  the  innumerable  stars  of  brilliant  lustre,  live  to 
the  end  of  Brahma's  day  (432,000,000  years  after  which 
occurs  the  dissolution  of  the  Universe).  At  the  beginning 
of  the  next  kalpa,  the  person  will  first  be  born  a  famous 
emperor  and  in  bis  next  birth,  he  will  bo  bom  either  a  king 
or  a  rich  man  or  a  Brahiniu. 


jmiTAT  SAMHITA. 


n.  U\] 

^  c*;  lli0  *-welvo  months  beginning  from  Marga- 
sirsha  (A ovember  and  December^  are  respectively  sacred  to 


Ivosava,  Nhrnynna,  Madhava,  Govunda, '  Yishnu,  Madhu 
SU(Jajia>  Trivikrawa,  Vnmana,  Sridbara,  Hrishikes*,  Pa u- 
manabha  and  DamotWa. 

Jb.  A  person  who,  having  fasted  proviosly ,,  worships 
Yiahnu  on  Dwacesi  dnr  s  singing  the  twelve  names  men* 
above  will  be  freed  from  tho  trammels  of  re-birth  and 
will  obtain  Salvation. 


CHAPTER  LIX.  (105). 

Co.N'CLUSlOK. 

1-  Plat  ting  the  hill  of  my  learning  in  the  vast  ocean 
of  Jyoti'sha  Sastra  and  churning  it . I  have  thus  brought 
out  this  bright  Moon  of  Science  which  sheds  its  light  of 
knowledge  over  tho  whole  world. 

-•  ^  ye  good  tin  n,  f  have  not  omitted  to  mention  any* 

thing  contained  in  the  old  Sastras  ;  you  may  compare  my 
work  with  t lie  Sastras  and  follow  the  rules  freely. 

k  If  good  critics  discover  a  few  merits  in  an  ocean 
of  demerits, it  is  their  nature  to  bring  the  former  to  the 
notice  of  the  world,  while  the  nature  of  bad  critics  is  just, 
the  reverse. 

■1.  Exposed  to  tho  fire  o!  malicious  criticism,  tho 
gold  of  a  literary  production  becomes  purified.  Every  at* 
tempt  must  therefore  be  made  to  bring  a  work  to  the  notieo 
of  severe  critics.  • 

5.  If,  in  any  of  the  copies  of  this  work  or  In  the  recE 
fallen  of  it  by  persons  who  have  learned  it  from  their 
preceptors,  the  learned  happen  to  notice  any  portion  either 
missing  pr  err  neons  or  omitted,  they  will,  it  is  hoped,  set- 
ting  aside  all  feelings  of  malice,  correct  the  error  or  supply 
the  omission. 


imiuT  sAJffliri. 


[Cir.  59>. 


fSL 


6.  By  the  blessing  of  the  Ban,  the  Sages  and  the 
reverened  preceptors  worshipped  by  me,  I  have  been  ablo 
to  write  this  brief  treatise.  Salutation  to  the  ancient  writer.) 
of  S  mlutu. 


3£XI>. 


CSL-AS- 

AS000114 

I  lllllll  Ollll  ID  HU  lltll  Hill  II  jljlH  mi  HU 

133.5  MIH-B 


