Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  Hbrary  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/| 


HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


HARVARD 

COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


RYAN 


ISCELLANY. 


am. 


THE 


BRIHAT    JATAKA 


OF 


Varaha  Mihira. 


TRANSLATED  IKTO  ENGLISH 


BT 


N-  Chidambaram  Iyer,  b.  a.,  r.  t.  s. 

FOUNDER 


Of  TBI 


TIRUVADI  JOTISTANTRA  SABHA 


IBegutered  Copy^'igliL'] 


|H  alit  a  0: 

1>KIMKP  AT  TB£  lOSTIB  FBEF8.  28  BUKDALL^S  BOAD,   YEVEBT* 

1885. 


nd  L  ^i:>\O.H.^ 


'^ 


INTRODUCTION.  ^OXsi 


There  is  probably  not  one  subject  which  is  so  ill  un- 
derstood^ which  so  many  people  pretend  to  know,  and  on 
which  so  many  arc  prepared  to  express  an  opinion,  as*  the 
subject  of  Astrology.  The  Indinn  proverb  truly  says  that 
there  is  no  man  who  is  not  a  bit  of  a  physician  and  an 
astrologer;  and  it  is  equally  true  that  there  is  no  subject 
which  is  so  ill  uuderstodd  as  these  two.  The  fact  is  that 
the  broad  medical  and  nstrological  principles  are  so  many 
that  everybody  of  necessity  learns  a  few  of  these,  but 
experiences  a  difficulty  in  mastering  all  of  them^ 

It  would  be  intercstiDg  to  note  the  various  subjects 
with  which  astrology  is  confounded*  Persons  with  well* 
developed  intuitions  are  often  found  to  make  correct  pre*' 
dictions  of  events.  The  Yogis  are  persons  of  this  descrip« 
tion.  Their  peculiar  knowledge  is  certainly  not  the 
result  of  any  study  of  nstrological  works.  We  also  find 
another  class  of  men  who  imitate  these  men  and  also 
make  striking  statements.  Birmingham  gold  is  often  taken 
for  sterling  gold  ;  German  silver  for  pure  silver  /and  we  have 

f\  variety  of  inferior  stoncS|  whitc^  red  and  green  that  are 
often  mistaken  for  diamonds^  rubies  and  omeralds*  The 
world  is  full  of  this  dual  character  of  things.  Every  depart* 
meut  of  true  knowledge  has  its  inferior  counterpart  /  and  so 
We  have  a  number  of  men  wlio^  possess! ug  no  occult  powers^ 
but  securing  tho  help  of  a  few  elemental  spirits,  practise 
imposition  on  the  ignorant  public.  But  the  world  is  not 
without  a  touchstone  to  detect  the  hoUowncss  of  their  pre- 
tensions! these  men  will  give  you  a  few  correct  particulars 
regarding  remote  past  eventSj  a  great  deal  of  particnlars  re- 


2  IKTBODUCTIOlr. 

garding    present     events^    one   or    two     parfciculars    re- 
gardinpf  the  immediate  future^   and  no  particulars   at  all 
about  the  distant  future.     I  have  known   these   men  and 
tested  the  trutli  of  their  statements.     I'heso  men  pretend  to 
be  astrologers.     Some  of  them  cnrry  no  books  at  all  and 
make    amazing  statements  touching  past  events  iU  prose 
and  verse  in   an   extempore  sing-song  fashion  and  without 
the  least   effort,  even  though   the   questioner  is  a  perfect 
stranger;  while  othei's  show  you  some  huge  antique  cadjan 
book  and  pretend  to  read  from  its  pages.     This  was  exactly 
the  way  in  which  Ool.  Olcottls  questions  were  recently  an- 
swered by  the  Brahmin  astrologer  who  pretended  to  read 
from  the  pages  of  the  works  of  the  Great  Bheemakavi  (vide 
May^  1885,  issue  of  the  Theosophist).     I  am  sure  that  nei- 
ther Col.  Olcottjnor  his  intelligent  friends  ever  had  a  look 
into  the  book  to  see  whether  what  was  read  out  was  really 
written  there,  and  if  so,  whether  the  writing  was  not  afresh 
one.     In  all  these  cases  the   astrologer^  if  he  is  one  at  all, 
doggedly  refuses  to  allow  others  to  look  into  his  book  /  for, 
he  says,  he  is  not '  permitted  by   the  book  deity  to  do  so  I 
There  is  a  more  wonderful  man  in  Pondicherr)'  at  present. 
He  pretends  to   read  from  the  works  of  Nandikeswara. 
Such   astrologers  are  making  vast  sums  of  money.    The 
statements  they  make  are   really  puzzling  ones*     But  for 
these  and    the  way  in  which  they  are  made>  the  utter  want 
of  preparation  and  the  like,  I  should  have  been  inclined  to 
discard  the   element  of  the  help  of  the  elemental  spints. 
Let  those  who  would  object  to  this,  examine  the  matter  and 
then  pronounce  an  opinion. 

Nothing  can  be  more  fanny  than  to  find  young  men 
especially,  taking]  up  astrology  as  thoir  first  subject  of 
attack  iu  their  public  utterances.  It  is  a  subject  to  which 
they  pay  little  or  no  attention  except  for  purposes  of  ridi* 
cule-    To  all  your  questions,  how  do  you  prove   this  fitate* 


IKTBODUCTIOff.  3 

ment  and  how  do  you  prove  that :  fcheir  One  rendjr  reply  is 
that  their  common  sense  tells  them  so*  They  forget 
that  common  sense  is  a  sense  which  changes  in  its  nature 
as  one  advances  in  his  study^  and  it  changes  ^o  much  that 
the  common  sense  of  one  age  is  dififerent  from  Uie  common 
sense  of  another  age,  the  common  sense  of  one  nation  or  of 
one  individual  is  diflferent  from  the  common  sense  of  ano- 
ther nation  or  individual.  Where  proof  is  ad vn need  by  a 
few,  it  is  eqniilly  interesting  to  examine  it.  The  proof  is 
that  such  and  snch  astrologers  made  sueh  and  such  pre- 
dictions and  that  the  predictions  have  failed — and  ergo, 
astrology  is  no  science  !  It  is  evidently  taken  for  granted 
that  the  astrologer  was  really  learned  in  the  science,  and 
that  there  were  not  those  numerous  errors  of  data  to 
mislead  him* 

Another  objection  to   the  science  is  that  astrologically 
the   fortunes   of  two  persons   born  at  the  same  moment  of 
time  bat  in  the  opposite  quarters  of  the  globe,  must  be  the 
same,  but  that  they  cannot  be  and  are  not  the  same*     Here 
is  an  ignorance  betrayed  regarding  the  elementary  principles 
of  the  science.     It  is  true  that  the  planetary  positions  are 
nearly  the  same  except  for  the  small  matter  of  parallax.  But 
it  is  not  the  planets  alone  that  gO  to  shape  one's  fortunes* 
Time   of   birth,  which   is  represented  by  the  Lagna  or  the 
rising  sign,  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  it.   In  other  words, 
because  the  local  times  of  the  two  places  are  different,  the 
Lagnas  must  be  different,'  for  when  the  20th  degree  of  Leo, 
for  instance,  is  in   contact   with  the  horizon  here,  the  20th 
degree  of    Aquaries  will  be  in  contact  with   the   horizon 
of  our  just  antipodes  at  the  same  moment.    Our  rising  sign 
is  their  setting  sign,  and  our  setting  sign  is  their  rising  sign; 
so  that  a  di (Terence  of  longitude  gives  a  diflTereuoeof  local 
time  and   consequently  a  difiference   of   Lagna.    But   sup- 
pjap  tl^Q  pliiQos  to  h^ve   th^  sfime   ^ongitudet    Take  two 


4  JNTBODUCTIOir. 

places  for  instance  on  the  same  meridian  and  therefore 
due  north  and  south  of  each  other*  Now  tlie  question  is 
whether  the  Lagna  is  the  same  for  both  the  places.  No*  The 
Lagua  is  a  point  in  the  eclipUo  which  is  incliued  to  the 
equator.  The  planes  of  the  horizon  of  the  two  places  are 
different  and  they  cut  different  parts  of  the  ecliptic.  It 
therefore  follows  that  a  difference  of  latitude  gives  a  differ- 
ence  in  the  Lagna.  So  that  places  with  a  difference  of  either 
longitude  or  latitude  or  with  both  cannot  have  the  same 
Lagna  at  the  same  time.  That  Lugna  or  mere  time  or  space, 
iiTespective  of  the  planets,  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  shap- 
ing the  fortunes  of  a  native  or  Jataki  will  be  a  new  revela- 
tion to  most  people.  We  will  come  to  this  subject  pre- 
sently. A  horoscopic  diagram  or  figure  of  the  heavens 
represents  both  local  time  or  Lagna  and  planetary  positions* 

What  then  is  Astrology  or  Horoscopy  P  What  is  its 
nature  and  what  its  bounds?  Here  is  the  author's  definition 
of  horqscopy, 

Horoscopy  is  stated  to  be  the  science  of  AJioratri  or  the 
science  of  day  and  night — these  being  the  broadest  visible 
divisions  of  time — multiples  of  which  give  weeks,  months, 
years,  &o.|  and  divisions  of  which  give  hours,  minutes, 
secondsj  &c,  The  first  letter  A9  and  the  last  letter /n,  having 
been  dropped,  the  term  has  assumed  the  shape  of  Jiora,  and 
the  author  says  that  hora  Shastra  treats  of  the  effects  of  the 
good  and  bad  deeds  of  an  individual  in  his  previous  birth ; 
80  that  the  moment  a  pei*son  is  born,  it  becomes  his  l«>fc  to 
enjoy  and  suffer  cert  tin  pleasuKes  aud  pains  for  hi8  past 
good  and  bad  deeds-^seeds  cast  into  the  cosmic  region  in 


IHTBOOUCTIOV.  0 

one  birth  begin  to  bear   sweet  and  soar  fruits  in  another 
birth  according  to  their  quality. 

In  this  connection  we  uitiy  sny  a  few  words  touching 
the  long  disputed  question  of  fatalism  versus  free-will.  Pel- 
sons  of  the  former  school  hold  that  even  the  minutest  events 
of  one's  life  are  pre-ordained^  nnd  that  man  is  completely  a 
puppet  in  the  bauds  of  certain  higher  agencies.  This  error 
has  evidently  been  the  result  of  the  observation  of  a  number 
of  well  projeoted  efforts  in  particulnr  directions  having 
been  thoroughly  discomfited.  Aguin^  men  of  the  other  school 
hold  that  man  is  a  free  ngent,  and  that  there  is  nothing 
impracticable  for  him  if  only  proper  means  are  employed  for 
the  purpose*  This  error  again  has  been  the  result  of  the 
observation  of  even  ill  projected  efforts  in  particular  direc- 
tions^ proving  highly  successful-— the  failures,  if  any,  being 
accounted  for  by  the  insufficiency  of  the  means  employed. 
In  the  one  case  man  beoomes  an  irresponsible  agent ;  and 
in  the  other  he  not  only  booltessly  grieves  over  his 
failures,  but  repeats  his  attempts,  thus  putting  himself  to 
trouble,  expense  and  vexation  only  to  fail  again.  Now, 
as  regards  the  former  position,  it  is  held  that  man's  pre- 
sent deeds  are  all  the  effects  of  his  previous  deeds.  As 
free  agency  of  any  sort  is  discarded  from  the  question, 
it  would  follow  that  these  previons  deeds  are  the  effects  of 
deeds  still  more  previous,  and  so  on,  ad  infinitum,  or  till  we 
are  brought  to  a  state  of  oosmic  evolution  when  differences 
of  states  and  conditions  were  infused  into  human  souls  by 
the  Creator.  Such  ^  condition  of  irresponsibility  is  opposed 
to  reason,  opposed  to  progress,  and  equally  opposed  to  divine 
and  human  law.  It  is  a  very  pernioious  doctrine  in  the 
extreme. 

As  regards  the  latter  view,  if  man  oan  wholly  shape 
his  own  fortunes^  how  nre  we  to  account  for  the  phenomena 
of  suffering  virtue  and  the  enjoying  vice  in  cerlain  cases*^ 


O  IITTBODUCTIOll, 

for  the  former  reaping  no  rewards  and  the  latter  escapiog 
punislimcnt.  A  satisfaotory  e;(pIanatioi]i  would  point  to  the 
former  as  being  the  effeots  of  previous  hanna,tii\i\  the  latter 
as  deeds  for  which  man  will  both  suffer,  and  enjoy  in  his  next 
life.  Taking:  entire  human  life  into  considemtion,  our  own 
opinion  is  that  man  is  both  a  slave  of  the  effects  of  his  past 
deeds  and  is  a  freet-agent  as  regards  fre^h  independent  deeds 
^'--deeds  which  are  in  no  way  directed  to  thwart,  to  arrest,  to. 
aUer  or  in  any  way  to  modify  or  remould  the  effects  of  his  past 
hnina.  But  if  he  wishes  to  move  along  with  the  current,  he 
may  do  so,  and  the  course  will  become  more  easy  and  more 
smooth.  This  view  will  account  for  three  things  i  (1 ) » the  many 
apparently  unacpountable  failures  of  attempts  eyen  when  the 
Tneans  employed  haye  been  good;  (2),  the  easy  success 
that  has  attended  many  an  effort  when  the  me^xns  employed 
were  even  weak  ;  (<'i),  the  success  whioh  in  certain  cases 
appears  proportionate  to  labor.  In  the  first  oase^  the  attempt 
was  one  aimed  at  moving  against  the  current  of  fate  ; 
ip  the  second  case  it  was  one  of  moving  down  with  the 
current,  and  in  the  third  case  it  was  motion  on  still  waterj 
where  and  where  alone  free  human  agency  can  display 
itself. 

Having  premised  so  much,  we  may  now  proceed  a  step 
further  and  state  that  where  the  current  is  a  weak  one 
running  with  the  course  of  a  Leena,  it  might  be  opposed, 
and  such  opposition  may  be  either  direot  or  oblique  accord* 
ing  to  the  fitness  and  strength  of  the  means  employed^  and 
that  the  task  would  become  a  difficult  one,  if  the 
course  to  be  resisted  should  flow  with  the  course  of 
a  Tigris.  The  question  is  purely  a  question  of 
karmic  .dynamios— ^effects  of  past  karma  as  opposed 
to  present  karma.  To  oppose  evea  an  opposible  force  > 
one  must  first  possess  a  knowledge  of  its  strength  an^ 
direption  o{  actioHj  aud  s§QQ4Glly*  a  knowledge  of  the  propQ^ 


ntftBODtfCTIOK.  7 

» 

nealis  to  be  empfojed  for  fche  ptirpose.  l*he  former  know- 
ledge is  supplied  to  man  by  astrology^  and  the  latter  by 
snch  works  as  tbe  K&f'mavipaka  Gtr^tidhn.  The  inenns 
prescribed  in  the  latiet  consist  of  gifts,  of  Japa 
(psychic  training  or  deyelopmectt)  and  certain  fire  ceriB- 
monies  having  an  occult  sign ificance^  ^  It  foltows  wbete  the 
current  is  Irresistible, the  attempt  to  oppofte  it  becomes  fdtile. 
How  can  a  person  over  hope  to  win  success  in  a  field  when  he 
is  ignorant  of  the  direction  of  alttnck  as  Well  as  the  strength 
of  his  enemy.  Astrology  not  only  points  out  to  liim  his  one* 
mies  but  his  friends  as  well^  whose  help  he  might  iseek  and 
obtain.  By  pointing  out  fields  where  thei'e  are  friends  and 
fields  where  there  are  foes^  astrology  indirectly  points  ont 
to  him  neiltrlbl  fields  where  man's  free  agency  has  its  full 
scope  of  action  and  where  success  is  proportionate  to  labor. 

Tbe  ne:tt  important  qaestion  for  consideration  is  the 
examination  of  the  connection^  if  any,  between  the  planets 
and  humah  fortunes  •  where  man  suffers  and  enjoye  the  fruits 
of  his  past  karmn>  the  question  ctaked  is  what  part  i\\^pla'Mt$ 
play  iu  such  human  huffering  nnd  enjoyment.  Here  again 
believers  in  t>etrology  as  a  science  are  divided  into  two' 
Bchool.s.The  one  admit  active  agency  for  the  planet?^  and  the 
other,  denying  it,  state  that  the  planets  blindly  nnd  mechani"* 
cally  indicate  the  current  of  human  destinies.  In  support  of 
the  latter  view,  it  is  stated  that  if  human  suffering  and 
enjoyment  are  directly  traceable  to  tnan's  previous  karma^ 
then,  td  admit,  active  agency  on  the  part  of  the  planets, 
becomes  not  only  superQuous,  but  inconsiRtelit. :  if  a  man 
loses  his  son,  it  is  because,  they  say,  he  suffers  for  his 
karma,  which  might  consist  in  his  having  caused  a  similar 
affliction  to  a  somebody  in  his  previous  birth,  and  not 
because  Mai*s  occupied  the  5th  bouse  from  the  ascendant 
or  Lagna  at  the  moment  of  birth,  and  ihat  therefore  the 
planetary  positions  only  indiecrie  and    do  not  bring    about 


8  INTRODUCTIOK. 

hnman  suffering  or  enjoymeDt.  These  people  from  a  homaii 
point  of  view  cannot  conceive  the  possibility  of  more  causes 
than  one  for  an   event— each  cause  acting  jndependently 
and  with  full  force.  ^Hindu  literature  is  full' of  events,  each 
of  which   is   the  immediate  effect'  of  a*nnmber  of  causes^ 
This  peculiar  combination  of   causes,  quite'  incomprehensi« 
ble  to  us,  is  a  feature  which  distinguishes  divine  deeds  from 
human  deeds.    We  will  quote  an  instance  or^two.     Ganga 
was    cursed  to    pass    through  a])^human  incarnation  ;  the 
Ashta    (eight)  Vasus    brought    on  themselves  a  similar 
curse — of  the  eight  Vasus  seven' were    allowed  to  return  to 
Swarga   immediately  after  birth  ;  Baja  Sautanu  goes  out 
on  a  hunting  excursion,  marries  Qauga,   whom  he   finds  on 
the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  on  condition  of  her  being  allowed 
to  quit  him  the  moment  he  opposes  her   own  mode   of  dis- 
posing of  the  issue  of  their  union.     Eight  children  are  born 
in  all.     The  mother  throws  the  first   seven  of  them  into  the 
Ganges  ;  the  king  puts  up  with  this  fop  the  love  of  the  lady. 
He  can  bear  no  more   inhuman   work  of  the  sort  and  so  he 
resists  ;  Ganga   quits  her  lord  leaving  the  babe — the  future 
.Bheeshma  of  ihe  M>ihabharat*    Again,  King  Basarntha  goes 
out  to  hunt  and  enters  a  dense  forest;  hearing  some  gur-i 
gling  sound  in  his  i^eiglibourhuod,  and  mistaking  it  to  be 
that  of  a  wild    elephant  in  the  act  of  drinking    water,   the 
king  discharges  his  arrow    in  its  direction  and   kills  a  lad 
who  was  dipping  Iiis  bowl   into  the   waters  of  a  stream  to 
carry  it  to  his  aged  parents  at  some  distance.   The  cries  of 
i\)e  dying  lad  brought  home  to  the   king  his  error,  and  the 
next  moment  the  king  himself  proceeds  to  the  lad's   father 
and  ^ntrt'ats  pardon.     This-  venerable  old  man    expires  on 
the  spot  pronouuoing^a  curse  on  the  king — rather  reading 
the  king^s   fate    that  in  his  old  age   he    shall  die  a  similar 
death  from    grief  on    account  of  his  son's    separation.     In 
the  meanwhile  Yishuu  himself  draws  on  his  own  bead  the 


IKTRODVOTION.  .  9 

curse  of  a  haman  incarhatioD,  attended  wiiH  mnch  ft^^ffering 
from  separation  from  wife^  from  the  sage  Bhriga,  ¥^hose 
wife  he  killed  when  she  refused  to  deliver  up  to  his  wrath 
an  Asura  who  had '  sought  her  protection.  The  Devas 
suffering  muoh  from  Havana  and  his  giant  hosts  prroceed 
to  Vishnu  and  entreat  relief.  As  Brahma  had  granted  to 
Havana  the  boon  of  exemption  from  death  from  all  except 
from  men  and  monkeys^  and  as  Dasaratha  had  prayed  to 
Vishnu  for  the  blessing  of  a  son,  Vishnu  enters  on  Kis 
human  incarnation  as  Bama,  the  son  of  Dasaratha.  From 
family  dissensions  he  quits  his  kingdom  and  enters  the 
forest  of  Dandaka  with  his  bride.  Grieved  at  his  son's 
separation,  Dasaratha  dies.  Bavana  carries  away  Seela  and. 
Bama  is  grieved  at  her  separation.  He  proceeds  to  Lanka^ 
slays  his  enemy  and  recovers  his  wife. 

Most  of  the  eminent  astronomers  of  tiie  East  and  West 
believed  in  a  double  Sun,  a  double  Moon^  Mars  and  other 
planets — the  one  is  the  Sthula  or  the  physical  one,  and  the 
other  is  the  Sukshma  or  the  astral  one.  The  difficulty  in 
conceiving  active  agency  as  possessed  by  the  planets  when' 
viewed  in  the  light  of  huge  inert  balls,  will  be  removed  when 
we  suppose  that  each  planet  possesses  a  soul.  Besides, 
there  is  nothing  repugnant  to  our  mind^in  the  idea  that  the 
planets  together  form  a  body  of  executive  officers  charged 
with  the  duty  of  rewarding  and  punishing  humanity  for 
their  past  karma  by  the  command  of  the  Most  High,  who 
at  the  same  time  allows  each  man  the  chance  to  ipiprove  his 
own  condition  by  making  him  a  free  agent  in  many 
matters.  A  man  is  whipped  for  theft  by  the  order  of  the 
Magistrate.  He  suffers  for  his  karma — the  deed  of  theft. 
But  the  whipping  officer  is  an  active  agent.  Take  another 
instance  :  A  man  does  a  piece  of  valuable  service  to  the 
state  ;  the  sovereign  commands  a  local  officer  to  invest  t^e 
person  with  the  order  of  knighthood ;  the  officer  obeys  ; 


10  lOTBODUCTION. 

the  officer  no  doubt  i^  aii  active  agents  though  the  honor 
was  the  immediate  effect  of  the  person's  services.  We  there* 
fore  hold  that  planets  not  only  indicate  human  destinies,  but 
bring  about  such  destinies.  The  world  is  a  mixed  field  of 
honor,  of  punishment  and  of  probation.  And  the  planets  are 
the  rewarding  and  chastising  officers,  and  meddle  in  no  way 
when  man  exercises  his  free  will  within  its  own  sphere. 

The  same  idea  might  be  represented  in  another  way  : 
planetary  activity  is  the  total  activity  of  a  number  of  forces, 
some  for  good  and  some  for  ^vil,  and  while  a  man's  karma 
leads  him  into  the  one  force  or  the  other,  there  are  other 
forces  by  a  knowledge  of  which  man  may  benefit  himself, 
though  it  may  not  be  his  lot  to  be  drawn  into  any  of  them 
by  his  past  karma.  If  this  were  not  the  correct  view  of 
the  part  played  by  the  planets,  a  large  portion  of  the  science 
of  astrology,  in  which  man  is  advised  to  avail  himself  of  such 
and  such  planetary  positions  for  particular  purposes,  would 
become  useless.  The  planets  therefore  can  be  made  to  do 
miore  than  the  work  of  jailors  and  rewarding  officera.  For 
,instanue,  in  the  fourth  chapter  (Brihat  Jataka)  which  treats 
of  Nisheka  (conception),  a  man  is  advised  to  avail  himself  of 
particnlar  planetary  positions  if  he  desires  an  excellent  issue : 
^  Parasara,  who  was  a  great  astronomer  and  astrologer,  finding 
thafc  such  an  hour  fo^  Nisheka  had  approached,  joined  a  boat- 
man's daughter  in  an  island  on  the  Jumna  and  the  issue  was 
the  greut  Yedavyaga.  A  Brahmin  astrologer  under  similar 
circumstances  joined  a  potter's  daughter,  and  the  issue  was 
the  great  Salivahana* 

That  man  is  not  altogether  a  free  agent  is  an  idea 
caught  by  Shakespeare  in  one  of  his  well  known  passages 
in  ^'  As  You  Like  It." 

'*  All  the  world  is  a  stage, 
Aud  all  the  men  and  women  merely  players  { 
They  have  their  exits  and  their  entranoes. 
And  one  roan  in  his  lime  plays  many  parts. 
His  acts  being  seven  sges." 


iNTBODUCTION.  ll 

Agaia,  while  tbe  heavens  totm  the  macrocosnii  man  is 
the  xnicrocQsm.  In  other  wordsi  eteh  man  is  a  little  world 
exactly  representing  the  Universe.  While  all  seems  quiet 
withoat,  there  is  an  active  world  within.    Such  a  world  is 

visible  to  the  inner  sight  of  a  Yogi*  Occalt  science  treating 
of  this  subject  says : — 

•        •        • 

If  the  Pranavayu  (vital  air)  can  be  taken  to  the  Sushm- 
nanadij  eight  sorts  of  music  will  be  heard>  and  fire^  lightnings 
stars^  the  moon  and  the  sun  will  become  visible.  Again,  in 
Chapter  lY,  already  referred  to,  Yaraha  Mihira  .snys  that 
menstrual  discharges  occur  in  wonaen  when  Mars  and  the 
Moon  approach  each  other.  In  connection  with  this  sub- 
ject the  author  of  Saratali  says  as'  fdllowS : — 

*^  The  Moon  is  water  and  Mars  is  fire  ;  bile  is  the  result 
of  a  mixture  of  fire  and  water,  and  when  bile  mixes  with 
the  blood,  menses  appear  in  women." 

So  that  With  the  cliiknge  that  is  going  on  without:, 
ther6  is  a'  change  going  on  within,  and  every  element  oi^  bit 
of  man's   physical   body  has    its   x'epreseiltative  in  the 


12  '  INTBODUCTION. 

heayens*  Sach  being  the  case^  there  is  a  subtle  connec- 
tion, imperceptible  becaase  subtle^  between  the  conditions 
of  the  planets  and  the  stars  above  and  tliose  of  man  below* 

We  shall  now  say  a  few  words  teaching  the  causes  of 
failure  of  astrological  'predictions :  the  most  important  of 
these  we  will  take  up  first. 

Astrology  rests  on  astronomy.  The  latter  science  was 
probably  in  a  good  condition  at  the  time  of  Yikramarka. 
The  tables  for  the  calculation  of  the  places  of  the  planets 
which  were  then  framed  or  then  in  use,  were  all  suited  to  the 
time.  Owing  probably  to  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  several 
working  parts  of  the  who>le  machinery  of  the  Solar  system, 
the  tables  of  one  age  are  unsuited  to  another  age.  To  this 
truth  the  ancient  Hindu  astronomers  were  keenly  aliye. 
They  have  accordingly  laid  down  this  broad  rule  for  the 
guidaifce  of  the  future  astronomers. 

Since  error  in  calculation  is  as  sinful  as  the  murder  of 
a  Brahmim,  the  correct  places  of  the  planets  shall  be  ascer- 
tained by  daily  meridian  observations. 

And  thiisi  cannot  be  done  without  an  Observatory.  Ob- 
servatories of  some  sort  did  exist  in  this  land  ;  but  owing 
to  foreign  invasions  and  the  want  of  encouragement  on  the 
part  of  rulers,  the  science  has  ceased  to  progress^  and  the  for- 
mer tables  for  want  of  corrections  have  become  useless.  The 
ealendars  therefore  prepared  by  the  native  astrologers  do 


INTBQDUOTION.  13 

nob  give  ihe  true  places  of  the  planets.  The  error  has  been 
going  on  for  the  last  1000  years. 

The  nautical  almanacs  prepared  in  Europe  and  Ame- 
rica give  very  correct  positions  of  the  planets;  and  Messrs. 
Bapu  DevaSastry  of  Benares^  Lakshmana  Chattai  of  Poona^ 
Baghanatba  Chariar  of  Madras^  and  Vencateswara  Deekshi- 
tar  and  Sundareswara  Srouty  of  Combaconum  have  started 
aJmanacs  basing  their  calculation  on  the  correct  modern 
tables.  These  tables  enable  ns  to  ascertain  correctly  the 
places  of  the  planets  from  the  Vernal  Equinox^  one  of  the 
two  points  where  the  ecliptic  cuts  the  equator*  This  point 
is  the  Western  first  point  of  Aries.  It  has  a  retrograde 
motion  at  the  rate  of  about  50'^  a  year.  But  the  Hindu 
first  point  of  Aries  is  the  fixed  star  Bevati  (the  Yogatara 
of  the  group)  which  is  stated  to  be  on  the  ecliptic.  This 
star  is  at  present  about  20^  to  the  £ast  of  the  Vernal  Eqni- 
nox.  Planetary  places  from  this  star  are  known  as  the 
Niraywna  Sphutanif  and  places  from  the  Vernal  Equinox  are 
known  as  the  Sayana  Sphutam.  The  little  bit  of  increas- 
ing space  between  the  two  points  is  known  as  Ayanamsa. 
Now  Hindu  astrology  rests  on  the  Nirayana  Sphutam  of 
the  planets,  and  modern  tables  give  us  the  correct  Sayana 
Sphutana ;  so  that  if  the  length  of  the  Ayanamsa  is  correctly 
known,  it  may  be  subtracted  from  the  Sayana  Sphutam,  and 

the  remainder  will  be  the  Nirayana  Sphutam  required. 
Bat  the  exact  length  of  the  Ayanamsa  is  not  known^  and  it 
cannot  be  ascertained  by  direct  observation^  because  the 
star  Revati  has  disappeared.  I  have  treated  of  this  subject 
at  some  length  in  the  April  (1883)  issue  of  the  Theosophist 
The  several  almanac  publishers  already  referred  to  have  arbi- 

« 

trarily  assumed  different  lengths  of  the  Ayanamsa,  evidently 
to  snit  their  own  convenience.  These  lengths  o£  the  Aya- 
namsa on  the  1st  January  1883  are  : — 


INTRODUCTION. 

9 

t 

// 

Almanac 

18 

14 

20 

1*  do  ... 

do  ...        ••• 
do  ... 
do  ... 

22 

2 

89 

21 
22 
20 

58 
41 
46 

29 
44 
15 

14 


(1)  Bombay 

(2)  Madras 
(8)  Gombaconam 

(4)  Benares 

(5)  Vakhya 

(6)  Biddhanta 

I  have  discovered  the  trae  length  to  range  between 
20^  23'  8''  and  20^  25'  22^'  on  the  Ist  January  1888.  By 
adopting  the  mean,  namely,  20^  24'  15^'  the  maximnm 
amount  of  error  will  only  be  V  7".  Now  the  diflference 
between  the  correct  Ayanamsa  and  the  yarioua  Ayanamsas 
above  given  will  be  seen  from  the  following :— « 

O  /        It 

(1)  Bombay 

(2)  Madras  i 
(8)  CombaconumJ 

(4)  Benares 

(5)  Vakya 

(6)  Siddhanta 

To  express  the  same  in  other  words.  The  Ayanamsa 
error  as  it  affects  the  planetary  positions  in  point  of  time  in 
the  first  four  almanacs  will  be  foqnd  to  be  as  follows: — 


•  •  t 


—  2 

9 

55 

+  1 

88 

24 

+  1 
+  2 
+  0 

84 
17 

22 

14 

29 
0 

Planets. 

1 

BombaT 

Madras  and 
Oombaoonnm 

Benares 

(beforej 

(after; 

(Iftfter) 

# 

day.    hour. 

V 

day.    hour. 

day.     hoar. 

Sun 

2          5 

1        16 

1         14 

Moon 

0          4 

0          8 

0          3 

Mars 

4          8 

8          8 

3          0 

Mercury        

0        13 

0        10 

0          9i 

Jupiter         

26          0 

19        17 

18        21 

Venus           

1          9 

1          0 

0        23 

Saturn          

64        16 

43        28 

46        20 

Moon's  node 

4U        21 

81         0 

29        16 

INTBODVOTION. 


15 


So  that  it  is  evident  that  horoscopes  constructed  on 
the  planetary  positions  as  found  in  the  existing  almanacs 
are  wrong. 

Again,  in  the  construction  of  horoscopes,  the  following 
wrong  table  showing  the  Rasimana  or  time  of  oblique  ascen- 
sion of  the  Zodiacal  signs  above  the  horizon  is  adopted  nearly 
throughout  the  land  by  a  great  majority  of  ignorant  astro- 
logers. 


• 

Obatikas. 

ObatikM. 

Aries 

4i 

Libra              ... 

6 

Taaras 

-•1 

Scorpio 

H 

Gemini 

5i 

Sagittary 

H 

Cancer 

H 

Capricorn 

8i 

Leo                  ... 

H 

Aquarius 

4f 

,  Virgo 

5 

Pisces 

H      . 

The  reader  is  referred  to  the  Appendix  for  a  correct 
table  for  all  the  places  of  India* 

A  third  cause  of  failure  is  an  ignorance  of  the  local 
time.  The  present  days  are  days  of  clocks  and  watches, 
and  these  are  luxuries  confined  to  our  towns  and  do  not 
extend  to  our  villages.  Besides,  these  clocks  and  watches 
are  rarely  made  to  show  the  local  time.  In  most  of  the 
places  of  Southern  Ipdia,  the  clock  shows  the  Madras  time» 
and  where  there  are  no  clocks  the  time  is  ascertained  by  a 
rough  calculation  applied  to  the  length  of  a  man^s  shadow. 
The  corrections  due  to  the  latitude  of  the  place  and  to  the 
position  of  the  sun  on  the^ecliptio  are  omitted.  At  night, 
if  the  sky  should  happen  to  be  clear,  the^transit  of  parti* 
cular  constellations  oyer  the  meridian  is  observed,  and  by 
the  application  of  a  rough  table  beginning  with 

^'  When  Sravana  crosses  the  meridian,  Aries  has  risen 
by  2f  Qhatikas/'  an  attempt  is  made  to  ascertain  the  local 
time.    In  the  first  pliu^e  the  table  is  a  rough  one,  and  in  the 


16  INTRODUCTION. 

second  place  it  applies  to  the  time  when  the  Yogatara  or 
chief  star  of  the  group  crosses  the  meridian/  The  table  there- 
fore becomes  useless  for  times  lying  between  the  transit  of 
the  Yogatara  of  one  group  and  that  of  the  Yogatara  of  the 
next  group.  Besides^  most  men  are  ignorant  not  only  of  the 
Yogotara  but  of  the  exact  position  of  the  meridian ;  and  turn- 
ing towards  the  star  which  might  be  to  the  east  or  west  of 
the  meridian,  they  fancy*  that  it  is  just  about  to  make  the 
transit.  If  the  night  happens  to  be  a  cloudy  one,  the  time 
is  purely  one  of  guess  work.  So  many  errors  must  of  neces- 
sity lead  often  to  an  error  in  the  Lagna  ;  and  when  this  oc- 
curs, it  upset3  the  whole  thing.  Add  to  this  the  errors  of  the 
calendar  relating  to  the  places  of  the  planets.  Cent,  per  cent, 
of  the  horoscopes  of  the  present  day  are  therefore  wrong.  It 
is  a  horoscope  of  this  type  that  is  put  into  the  hands  of  a 
person  who  calls  himself  an  astrologer.  In  a  great  number 
of  cases>  Indian  astrologers  are  poor  men  who  have  betaken 
themselves  to  the  study  of  the  science  as  a  means  of  liveli- 
hood. The  public  would  pay  them  only  if  they  would 
predict  some  good  fortune  ;  if  he  correctly  predicts  an  evil, 
he  is  not  only  not  paid  anything,  but  is  set  down  for  a 
sorcerer,  whom  it  would  not  be  safe  to  approach.  Thus  the 
astrologer  is  induced  to  conceal  any  unpleasant  truths  which 
he  might  happen  to  know,  and  after  this  the  complaint  is 
that  the  predictions  of  such  and  such  astrologers  have 
failed  !  For  want  of  encouragement  the  astrologer  pays  little 
attention  to  the  study  of  his  subject  and  often  has  recourse 
to  the  help  of  the  black  art  as  already  described. 

We  shall  now  say  a  few  words  regarding  a  particular 
branch  of  the  science  known  as  Prasna  or  Arudha  Shastra, 
horary  astrology.  This  differs  from  horoscopy  or  nativities 
in  this  respect,  viz.,  while  the  latter  rests  on  the  motions  of 
the  visible  planets  round  the  sun^  the  former  rests  mainly 
on  the  motions  of  certain  invisible  planets  which  are  sup- 


iirrRoDUcnoK.  }7 

posed  ta  moye  ronndthe.  horisson.  Their-Iaws  of  motion 
are  exceedingly  simple*  These  planets,  wbjich  are  8  iu  num- 
ber, move  in  the  following  order;  The  San,  Mars,  Jupiter, 
Mercury,  Yenusy  Saturn,  the  Moon  and  Bahu,  at  the  distance 
of  a  sign  and  a  half,  or  45^  from  one  another  and  take  one 
full  day  or  24  hours  to  go  round  the  horizon — the  Sun  being 
at  the  first  point  of  Aries  every  day  at  sunrise,  the  horizon 
being  their  eoh'ptic  and  divided  into  12  equal  parts,  eaoh 
part  being  known  as  a  sign,  and  Tauiiis,  Leo,  Scorpio  and 
Aquarius  being  res]f)ectively  the  due  eastern,  southern,  west- 
ern and  northern  signs*  The  remaining  8'signs  occupy  the 
four  corners,  two  for  each  corner,  one'  on  each  side  of  the 
corner  point — Aries  being  situated  to  the  right  of  the  north* 
eastern  point,  the  order  of  the  signs  remaining  the  same  as 
in  the  heavens  above.  The  astrologer  forms  as  it  were  the 
Sun,  round  whom  the  planets  revolve.  The  direction  '  of 
(sign  occupied  by),  the  querent  is  noted  down  as  well  as 
the  position  of  the  invisible  planets  at  «the  .  time*  We 
cannot  enter  into  the  details  of  the  process  of  calculation 
here.  The  astrologer  proceeds  to  discover  the  matter  ques- 
tion and  then  makes  his  predictions  with  the  help  of  his 
books.  In  this  he  is  assisted  by  another  department  of 
astrology  known  as  Angavidya  or  Cheshta  Sliastra  which 
rests  oil  the  motions  of  human  limbs,  casual  words  and  the 
like.  Angavidva  rests  on  the  theory  that  an  AU-pervading 
Intelligence  is  pointing  out  to  the  astrologer  (who  is 
otherwise  unable  to  know  ifc)  the  miiuite  events  of  life  in  a; 
hundred  ways.  (Vide  chapter  51  of  Varaha  Mihira^c  Brihat 
Samhita). 

Horoscopy  difEers  from  horaiy    astrology  in  another. 

important  point :  while  the  former  enables  one  to  predict) 

even  the  distant  events  of  life,  the  lattef  refers  only  to 

events  of  the  immediate  future,  and  while  the  one  deals  with 

3 


18  INTAODUCnOK. 

events  of  considerable  inportanoe^  the  latter  deals  mainly 
with  events  comparatively  iiisignificant^  suohj  for  instance, 
as  the  sort  of  meal  which  one  would  take  in  the  course 
of  a  day,  the  direction  of  his  seat  and  the  like* 
In  finch  cases  the  astrologer  geuerally' writes  out  his  an- 
swers in  a  bit  of  paper  and  folds  it  up  asking  the  qnestioner 
to^look  into  it  after  the  event/f or,  the  course  of  such  minor 
evcLtsof  life  can  be  easily  altere  bdy  a  previous  knowledge* 
These  events  of  life  are  the  immediate  effects  of  aset  of 
circumstances  in  whioh  a  persou  lias  just  plaoed  himself 
the  natural  immediate  effects  of  which  form  mattei's  for 
the  consideration  of  horary  astrology,  and  do  notcomie  within 
the  scope  of  horoscopy.  •  -^fter  a  person  has  begun  to  apply 
his  axe  to  a  tree,  it  may  not  bo  diflScult  to  predict  the  directiou 
of  its  fall>  but  not  before.  It  would  therefore  be  wrong  to 
conclude  from  these  minor  predictions  of  horary  astrology 
that  the  minutest  events  of  one's  life  are  preordained  and 
that  man  has  no  control  over  them. 


It  only  remains  to  say  a  few  words  about  certain  books 
known  as  Nadigrandlmms.  These  purport  to  contain  a 
brief  account  of  the  lives  of  all  mankind.  It  would  appoar 
on  a  superiioial  consideration  of  the  subject  that  such  books 
cannot  at  all  exist.  That  they  exist  is  a  fact  and  the  ques- 
tion therefore  is  how  came  they  to  exist— how  were  tjbey 
prepared. 

The  planets  occupy  particular  places  on  the  ecliptic  at 
particular  points  of  time.  Every  moment  their  positions  are 
changing.  The  question  then  is  in  what  period  of  time 
the  planets  return  to  their  former  pdsicions.  This  is  a 
question  of  Arithmetic"»a  question  of  the  Least  Common 
Multiple  of  7  or   8  numbers.    These  numbers  ai*e    the 


UITBODUCTIOK.  19 

■iderial  periods  of  Mercury^  Venai,  Eartbi  JiSatb,  Japiier 
And  Saturn  and  o{  the  Moon,  yiz*> 


Mercury 

87-9693 

days 

Venus 

1224*7008 

ft 

Earth 

•... 

865*2564 

99 

Mars 

6869795 

9t 

Jupiter 

4332-5848 

99 

Saturn 

10759-2200 

ff 

Mood 

... 

27  ds.  7  hrs. 

45  m.  11*6  s. 

No^  the  L.  C.  M.  of  the  above  numbers  is  the  Enlp 
of  the  Hindu  Astrouomy  is  Tvhicb  4320000000  siderial  years. 
After  which  the  planets  all  return  to  the  firsi:  point  of  Aries 
at  the  horizon  of  Lanka — a  place  on  the  equator  whose 
longitude  is  760  E.  from  Greenwich.  A  Kalpa  consists  of 
1000  Chataryngas.  A  Chaturyuga  coni^'sts  of  4320000 
siderittl  years,  of  which  Kah'ynga  consists  o(  432000  siderial 
years- 

Dwapara  yuga         432000  X  2     =     864000    years. 
•   Treta  yuga    ...        482000  X  3     =    1296000        „ 
Erita  yuga.  ...        432000  X  4    =    1728000       u 

^  A  Kalpa  forms  Brahma^s  day,  at  the  end  of  which 
the  M^hnprnlaya  commences.  Againy  the  number  of 
Basi  Chakrams  of  the  Zodiacal  representations  of  the 
positions  of  the  planets  is  also  limited.  How?  Suppose 
there  was  only  one  planet,  say,  the  Sun.  He  might 
occupy  any  one  of  the  12  houses;  so  might  Mars  and 
each  of  the  other  planets.  The  VJ*  places  of  the  Sun 
combined  with  the  12  places  of  Mars  will  give  us  12*  or 
144  different  places  for  the  Sun  and  Mars.  These  combined 
with  the  12  places  of  Jupiter  will  give  12«xl2  or  12*  or 
1728  places  for  the  three  planctsi,  the  Sun,  M  u*r  atid  Jupiter. 
Similarly  4  planets  will  give  12*  positions  and  5  planets 
will  give  12^  positions,  and  so  on*    Now   horoscopy  deals 


20  INTRODUCTIOITy 

with,  the  positions  of  the  fiyer  planets  Mercury,,  Venus,' 
Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn^  as  well  as  the  San,  the  Moon> 
and  Balm  (jyioou's  asceuding  node).  »0f  these  8  plapets,'  all, 
excepting  the  inferior  planets,  Mercury  and  Venus,  will 
give  us  12°  positions.  Now  the  greatest  elongation  of 
Mercury  from  the  Sun  is  about  19^,  and  that  of  Venus  is 
about  47^  ;  so  that  when  the  Sun  occupies  a  particular  sign. 
Mercury  will  occupy  either  that  sign  or  the  sign  next  after 
it  or  next. before  it ;  eimilfirly  Venus  will  be  either  in  the 
house  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  in  one  of  the  two  signs  next 
after  it  or  next  before  it.  In  other  words,  the  number 
already  obtaiued  will  have  to  be  increased  threefold  on 
account  of  Mercury  and  fivefold  on  account  of  Venus.  The 
number  then  is  12°  X  3  X  5.  Combine  with  this  the  12 
Lagnas.  The  tojtal  number  of  Rasi  Ghakrams  therefore 
is  ia«  x8  X  6  X  12=12'X  15=537477120.  So  that  while 
the  limit  of  time  is  432,0000000  siderial  years,  the 
limit  of  Basi  Chakrams  during  that  period  is  537477120- 
These  figures  have  been  stated  simply  with  the  object  of 
dispelling  certain  wrong  notions  that  the  number  of 
horoscopic  Rasi  Chakrams  is  infinite  and  that  the  changes 
go  on /for  an  infinite  period  of  time.  On  the  cipher  hand^it 
would  be  wrong  to  suppose  thac  the  scope  of  a  Nadigrun- 
dham:  extends  to  the  period  o(  a  Kalpa  or  that  it  treats  of 
so  many. chakrams*  The, chakrams  themselves  cannot  be; 
so  many  iti  reality,  the.  number  given  above  expresses  the 
possible  number  of  poiitiiious  iu  which  the  planets  can  be 
conceived  to  bo  placed  in  the  12  uigiis  of  the  Zodiac  algc' 
braically^  But  thoy  caunot  assume  all  these  positions,  for . 
this  simple  reason,  that  they  have  motions  of  their  own 
and  can  oaly  come  to  particul^^r  positions  subject  to  suph 
motions.    Again,  of  537477120  horoscopic  Basi  Chakrams,^ 


*  UranoB,  Neptune  and  other  telescopio   planets   aro  not    sappoied  to 
leroiae  auy  appreoiable  iuflaence  over  human  alEair*.''      ^    ."  ■ ,    ' ^ 


INTBODUOnOK.  21*. 

reduced,  as  jast  pointed  out,  a  very  large  number  refer  to 
nnimals  and  plants,  (vide  Ch.  3  on  Animal  and  .Vegetable 
horoscopy).  Again,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  Nadi- 
grandhams  treat  of  any  period  of  time  other  than  the  pteAotit 
Kaliyuga^  fiwd  it  is  probable  that  those  hUman  cbakrams 
that  pointed  to  births  in  other  yugas  have  been  rejected. 
Now  a  muriiber  of  horoscopes^  though  agreeing  in  the  broacl  ^ 
Zodiacal  divisions  of  the  planetary  plaoes^  might  show  great 

difTerences  where  the  divisions  are  more  minute  ;  as  the 
Navnmsai  Trimsamsa,  Hora^  Drekkann,  Dvadasamsa  and 
the  like  divisions^  and  it  might  be  asked  wliether  the  Nadi- 
grHndharos  recognize  these  divisions^  and  if  uot^  on  what 
basis  these  graudhams  are  built. 

*  The  360  degrees  of  the  ecliptic  are  divided  info  12 
eqnal  parts  of  30  degrees  each,  and  each  division  is  known  ns 
a  sign  of  the  Zodiac.  Each  signj  for  purposes  of  Nadi- 
grandhams  is  divided  into  150  parts  known  as  amsas,  and 
these  amsas  have  particular  names  assigned, to  themi  such 
as  Vasudha,.  Vyshnavi,  Brahifiij  Kala  Kvia,  ^hi,  Saiikari, . 
and  so  forth*  A  degree  of  the  ecliptic  confAins  5  such  partff^ 
and  each  part  is  divided  into  two  halves  known  as 
Poorvabhaora  and  ITtfarabhaga,  ue,y  the  first  half  and  the 
second  half.  For.  each  half  the  Nadigraudham  contains  a 
life>  and  this  half  represents  in  space  6  minutes,  and  in  time 
a  Vighatika  or  24  seconds.  So  that  the  mumber  of  horos- 
copes treated  of  in  Nadigrandhams  as  regards  the  amsas  is 
8,600.,  Now  the  first  volume  of  Dhruvanadi  gives  a  brief 
account  of  the  lives  of  persons  for  the  many  amsas  already 
refeiTed  to.  The  sketch  is  quite  independent  of  the  posi- 
tion  of  the  planets  and  holds  true  with  some  slight  alterations 
from  planetary  influences.  The  points  treated  of  refer  to 
the  material  points  of  one's  life.  Now  in  thecnse  of  human 
horoscopy  there  i^  a  law  connecting  the  aynsas  -  with  the  * 
positions :  of » the  planets.    I  ioug  siispected  that  such  a  law  ^ 


22  INTRODUCnOK. 

of  connection  roast  exist.  For  otherwise  it  wbnld  not  be 
possible  to  describe  correotly  the  positions  of  the  planets 
several  thousand  yeiu's  hence  and  for  such  long  ages.  I 
exuniined  the  pages  of  the  voUime  already  referred  tO|  and 
found  the  author  writing  in  one  place  as  follows  :-— 

'^  We  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  method  of  dis- 
covering the  places  of  the  planets  for  the  several  amsas  for 
human  births."  A  thrill  ol:  joy  ran  through  me  whioh 
Was  soon  followed  by  bitter  disappointment.  For  the  next 
cadjun  leaf  which  ought  to  have  contained  the 
information  wanted  was  missing  I  Some  person^  evidently 
seeing  the  importance  of  the  informationy  must  have  carried 
awny  the  leaf  of  the  book  I  examined.  Our  readers  are 
requested  to  examine  other  copies  of  the  1st  volume  of  the 
Dhruvanadi. 

The  iiuthor  of  a  Nadigrandhnm  takes  np  an  amsam  and 
jots  down  the  positions  or  the  several  sets  of  positions  of  the 
planets,  taking  into  consideration  especially  their  Zodiacal 
divisions^  and  by  slightly  altering,  or  adding  to,  the  brief 
sketch  above  referred  to,  for  the  amsas,  finishes  his  account 
of  a  life.  The  author  says  that  he  treats  only  of  about  SO 
or  40  important  points  in  each  life.  Now  under  one  of 
these  accounts  a  number  of  persons  will  fall  whoso  lives  will 
show  difierences  of  a  more  minute  nature  whioh  the  Nadi- 
grandham  does  not  take  into  account.  The  Nadigrand- 
hams  therefore  are  only  very  brief  sketches  of  human  lives. 
A  really  learned  astrologer  can  write  out  an  account  of  a 
roan's  life  10  or  20  times  the  length  of    the  sketch  in  a 

Nadigrandham, 

• 

This  perhaps  is  the  proper  place  for  a  few  words  regard- 
ing a  common  complaint  on  the  pnrt  of  persons  who  have 
consulted  the  Kadigrandham?,  that  these  books  are  under  a 
cursQf    that  they  correctly  describe  the  post  events  of  a 


iMTRODUcnoir.  SS 

perabn's  ]ife  and  err  regarding  the  futnre  events.  The  fault 
is  not  that  of  tho  Qrandham ;  it  oertainly  would  not  be  pos- 
sible for  the  author  to  ascertain  before-liand  at  whnt  period 
of  ono^s  life  the  book  would  be  consulted^  and  then  to  give  a 
coiTecb  account  of  such  life  till  that  period  of  time,  and  then 
(for  such  an  able  astrologerj  purposely  to  err.  The  fact  is 
that|  as  already  explained,  the  position  of  the  planets  na 
shewn  in  the  horoscopes  do  not  agree  with  any 
given  in  the  Nadigrandhams.  The  possessor  of  a  Nadi-  / 
graudh'iu  examines  a  number  of  horoscopes  in 
which  the  planetary  positions  very  nearly  approach 
those  shewn  by  the  horoscopes  presented  to  him*  The 
neiirer  the  astrologer  approaches  tho  correct  horoscope, 
the  more  numerous  will  be  the  points  of  agreement  between 
the  life  suspected  as  the  correct  life  and  the  actual  life  of 
the  persoti*  Now,  if  while  the  astrologer  reads  out  from 
his  book,  the  person  consulting  it  meets  witji  any  past 
events  of  his  life  not  tallying  with  the  statements  of  the 
book,  the  pages  are  set  aside  and  other  pages  examined.  But 
if  no  discrepancy  is  noticed,  the  person  comes  hastily  to  the 
cohclDsion  that  the   life    picked  out  is   his  and  goes   home 

satisfied,  with  a  copy  of  it.  lu  such  cases,  the  chances  of 
disappointment  are  more  numerous  than  those  of  success 
The  best  plan  would  be,  for  a  person  who  wishes  to  con- 
sult the  Nadigrandhams,  to  have  his  horoscope  prepared 
with  the  help  of  the  correct  modern  tables  and  the  correct 
ayanamsa.* 

As   regards  the  first  astrological  work  taken  up  for 
translation,  viz.,  the  Brihat  Jataka  of  Yaraha  Mihira,  it  is 


*Tliii  work  can  be  done  at  this  office  for  aiij  person  who  would  left 
ne  know  the  time  and  place  of  his  birth  for  a  fee  of  fis.  3.  But  we  can- 
not  undertake  to  refer  to  any  Nadigrandham  aa  we  haye  no  vneb 
work  with  m. 


.  24i  JNTBODUOTION. 

.generally  considered  as  one  of  tbebest  works  qd  thesoience* 
.Theautbor  himself  says  of  it  aa  follows:        ,,. 

'^  For  the  benefit  of  those  of  broken  attempts  to  cross 
•  the  ocean  of  horoscopy,  I  construct  this  little  boat  consist- 
ing of  a  variety  of  metres^  with  a  multiplicity  of  meanings*-' 
Most  of  the  stanzas  are  purposely  intended  to  convey 
several  meanings.  Four  commentaries  have  accordingly 
sprung  up.  The  well  known  one  is  that  of  Bhatta  Utpala  ; 
another  is  known  as  Subodliini  >  both  of  these  are  now 
.with  me;  a  third  commentary  is  known  as.  Mudniksuri^ in 
iwhich  ic  is  said  that  most  of  the  stanzas  are  interpreted 
urithmetically — the  letters  all  standing  for  so  many  figures 
and  the  figures  representing  the  27  a^^teri^ms,  the  12  signs, 
the  9  plauets^and  so  forth.  The  fourth  common tury  is 
ki^own  as  Sreepateeyam.  . 

'     The   author  has  written  a  smaller  work  on  astrology 

known  as  L^glm  Jataka.  Hence  the  present  work  is  styled 
the  Briliat  Jataka.  Jataka  or  horoscopy  is  one  of  the  three 
sections  of  Jyotis-Sastra  ;  and  the  author  has  treated  of  all 
the  three  branched.  The  othur  two  branches  are  Saoiliita 
and  Astronomy.  .  Yaraha.  Mihira's  work,  on  the  former^ 
known  as  the  Brihab  iSamhita,  is  now  being  translated  by 
me,  and  his  astronomic<il  work  is  known  as  Punchasindban- 
tika.  It  was  long  supposed  to  have  been  lost.  Fortu- 
nately  two  copies  of  this  rare  work  were  recently  disco- 
vered, and  they  were  purchased  b}'  the  Bombay  Government. 
M-  Thibaut,  Phil.  Dr.  is  now  preparing  an  edition  and  an 
English  translation  of  the  same^  assisted  by  Pundit  Suddha- 
kara.  Yaraha  Mihira  has  also  written  a  work  known  as 
Yogayatra.  A  manuscript  copy  of  this  work  is  with  l)t» 
Kerne,  now  in  Leydon,  Holland. 


IHTRODVCTION.  25 

I  have  deemed  it  advisable  to   explain  and  retain  tlib 
use  of  a  number  of  Sanscrit  terms  for  the  oonveoience  of  the 
natives  of  this   conntryy  Mrho  must   be  more   familiar  with 
tliem  tban  with  tlieir  English  equivalents  where  such  exist. 
It  may  be  well  to  state  here  some  of  the  subjects  treated  of 
in  the  work  now  taken  up  for   translation.     The  book  con- 
tains 28  chapters.    The  first  two  chapters  relate   to  defini- 
tions of  astrological   terms  and   to  elementary  principles. 
The  third  relates  to  animal  and  vegetable  horoscopy.     The 
fourth  treats  of  the  determinatiom  of  the   nature  of  issoe— > 
their  physical  peculiarities^  fortunes,  &c.>from  the  planetary 
positions  at  the  time  of  conception.   A  chapter  is  devoted  to 
the  determination  of  the  description   of  the  plaee  of   birth 
and  the  other  incidents  connected  with  the  time  of  birth  from 
planetary  positions  with  a  view  to  the  correct  ascertainment 
of  the   Ijagna.     The  next  chapter  treats  of  enrly  death — 
Balnrishta,  and  the  next  is  devoted  t9  the  determination  of 
the  length   of  life  of  a  native — Jataki.     A   chapter   is  de- 
voted to  the    particular  avocations  of  men  and  to  their 
sources  of  wealth.   Then  follow  several  important  chapters 
on  Raja  and  other  Yogas.  The  chapter  on  Pravrijya  yoga  de- 
termines under  what  planetary  aspects  a  native  will  turn  out 
an  ascetic.     The  chapter  beaded  Anisbtadhyaya  contains  a 
number  of  malevolent  planetary  positions^  each  connected 
with  some  evil  of  human  life.  A  chapter  is  devoted  to  women* 
This  is  followed  by  a  chapter  which  describes  the  particular 
manner  in  which  a  person   meets   with  his  death   and  the 
nature  of  his  future  life.  In  the  next  chapter  the  author  lays 
down  rules  for  the  determination  of  the  horoscope  of  a  per- 
son ignorant  of  his  time    of  birth.     The   above  is  not   a 
complete  list,  and  it  would  be  wrong  to  jjildge  of  the  inter- 
esting nature  of  the  contents  of  each  chapter  from  the  brief 
account  given  above. 

The  appendix  to  the  translation  will  contain  numeroni 


26  INTBODUCTION. 

tables  and  diagrams  relating  to  the  construction  of  boros- 

copes  and  to  the  ascertainment  of  the  local   time  by  the 

Bun-dial>  by   the  Bhado^>  and^  at  night,  by  the  transit  of 

the  stars  over  the  meridian.    We  will  also   state  rules  for 

the  construction  of  the  plane  of  meridian   by  means  of  fine 

threads  for  purposes  of  observation.    The  appendix  will 

also  contain  a  few  tables,  for  the  calculation  of  the  lengths 

of  the  Dasas  and  Bhukties. 

We  may  conclude  this  Introduction  with  •  the*  words  of 

Zadkiel  and  ^'  advise  those  who  value  truth  to  spend  a  few 

days  in  examining  the  principles   laid  down  in  this    work 

and  applying  them  to  their  own    individual  cases  before 

they  join  the  herd   of  the  learned     and   the  unlearned  in 

pledging  their  words  to  a  false  assertioui  viz.^  that  Astrology 

is  an  unfounded  science.'' 

N.  0. 
HAt)UBA;  2nd  Jwi$  1885. 


The  following  lisfe  of  Astrological  terms  defined  in 

the  firat  two  chapters  and  arranged  alphabetically  with 

the  stanzas  given  opposite  'to  each  is  published  for  con^ 

venienoe  of  refercDoe. 

Gh.  Stanza*' 


•  •• 


•  •  • 


•  •  • 


•  •• 


•  •• 


••• 


Agjna  (10th  house) 

Akokera  (Greek  name  for  Makara,  Capricorn) 

Ambu  (4th  hoase)        

Angles  or  qaadrants,  their  strength  ..* 

Antyabha  (Sign  Meenn,  Pisces) 

Apoklima  (the  3rd^  6th,   9ih  and  12  houses 

from  the  ascendant)  

Aspects,  planetary,       

Astabhavana  (7th  house  or  setting  sign) 
Atimitragraha,  very  friendly  planets 
Atisatrugraha,  very  inimical  planets  .. 


>••• 


•  •  • 


•  •  • 


•  •• 


B. 

Benefic  planets  •  •  •        •  •  • 

Benefio  signs     ... 

Biped  signs,  their  strength 

C. 


••• 


«•• 


•  • . 


..t 


••• 


•  • . 


• .  • 


•  •  • 


Castes,  planetary  divisions  of  ... 
Centiped  signs,  their  strength... 
Ghara  rasi^  movable  signs       ••• 
Chaturasra,   4th  and  8th  houses 
Chatushpada  rasi,  quadruped  signs 
Gheshtabala,  motional  strength  of  planets 
Clothes,  planetary  divisions  of . . . 
Colors,  planetary  divisions  of..* 
Colors,  of  Zodiacal  signs 
Common  signs  ••• 


.  •  • 


••• 


« •  • 


.•  • 


.  •  • 


••• 

.  • . 
» • « 

•  •  • 
... 


••• 


« «• 


•  •  • 


D. 


Dakshina  rasis,'  Southern  Bigns 

,  Depreasioa  signs  and  degrees  ... 

Devas,  planetary  diTieions  of  ... 


I 
I 
I 
I 

I 

I 
II 

I 

II 
II 


II 

'I 

I 


II 
I 
I 
I 
I 

II 

II 

II 

I 

I 


•  •• 


.  •  • 


•  •  t 


. « • 


•  .• 


•  •  • 


I 

I 

II 


16 

8 

18 

19 

8 

18 
13. 
18 
19 
19 


5 
11 
19 


7 

19 
11 
16 
]9 
19 
12 
4  &  o 
20 
11 


11 

13 

6 


ASTROLOQICAL  TERMS. 


•  •• 


•  •  • 


Dhftfus  or  elements  of  the  body,  planetary 

divisions  of. ..         * 

Dik  bala,  quarterly  strength  of  planets 

Dik,  direction  of  planets         

directions  of  planets     

Diurrml  ait/ns 

Drekkanas.  their  lords 

Drishti,  planetary  sight  or  aspect       ,,• 

Dnschikya,  3rd  house 

Dwadasabhava,  signification  of  the  12  houses,.. 
Dv^adasamsa,    division  of  a  sign    into   12 

fliftl  vo  •••.  •••  •••  •••  ••• 

Dwelling  .   houses,    planetary    divisions    of 

parts   of 
Dwipada  rasip,  biped  signs 
Dyuna,  7th  house 


•  t  • 


» •  • 


•  f  • 


•  t  • 


•  •  • 


•  •  t 


Oh. 

Stanza. 

II 

11 

II 

19 

II 

5 

II 

5 

I 

10 

I 

11  &  12 

II 

IS 

I 

19 

I 

15&16 

I 

6 

II 

12 

I 

19 

I 

16 

E, 


•  •  • 


Eastern  signs 
Elements^  dhatus,  of  the   body^  planetary 
divisions  of  ...         ...         ... 

Elements^  planetary  divisions  of. 
Exaltation  signs  and  degrees  ... 


•  •• 


F. 


Female  planets  ... 

Female  signs     ...    ' 

Fixed  signs 

.Flavor,  planetary 

'Foot,  signs  that  rise  with  their. 

Forms  of  the  si<;ns 

Forms  of  the  planets.  ... 

Friendly  planets. 


•  •• 


•#• 


•  •• 


G. 


•  •  • 


»*• 


•  *  • 

•  •• 

•  •  • 

•  •• 


Garments,  planetery  divisions  of 
Greek  names  for  Zodiacal  si^ns. 
6una^  temper^  planetary  divisions  of;.. 


•  •  • 


• .  • 


u 


••« 


[I 

11 

II 

6 

I 

13 

II 

6 

I 

11 

I 

11 

II 

U 

I 

10 

I 

5 

II 

8  to  11 

II 

13  to  13 

II 

12 

I 

8 

II 

7 

ASTROLOGICAL  TERMS. 


JJl 


•  •  • 


•  •« 


•  •• 


H. 


Heacls,  signs  iLali  rise  wifch  their      ... 
Head  and  tail,  si^n  that  rises  ^nrith  its 
Hermaphrodite  plnnets...         ...         ... 

HibukH,  4th  house 
Uora 

Horas,  their  lords         , 

HonseS)  their  lords       

Hridroga.  .Greek  name  for  Kumbha,  Aquarius 


••• 


•  f  • 


Gh.  Stanza. 


10 
10 

6 
IR 

9 
11&12 

« 

8 


L 


Immovable  signs 
Inimical  planets 


J. 


•  »• 


Jamikra,  7th  house        ... 

Jati,  Caste,  of  the  planets 

Jituma,  Greek  name  forMithuna,  Gemini 
Juka,  Greek  same  for  Tula,  Libra 


•«• 


...  I 
...  lI 

11 

15  to  18 

...  I 
...  Ir 
...  I 
...    I 

18 
7 
8 

6 

K. 


Eala,  time,  planetary  lengths  of 
Kala  baia>  periodical  strength  of  planets 
Kala  purusha,  planetary  divisions  of 
Kala  purusha,  Ziodiaoal  division  of  ... 
Karmasthanam  10th  honse  ••• 
Kendra^  quadrants  or  angles,  their  strength 
Kourpya,  Greek  name  for  Vrischika,  Scorpio. 
Kria,  Greek  name  for  Mesha,  Aries  ... 
Kuliraj  Kataka,  Cancer 


•*• 


• .  • 


•  • . 


••  • 


t  •• 


. .  • 


n  14 

II  IS) 

II  1 

I  4 

I  18 

I  17  &19 

I  8 

I  8 

I  8 


•  •. 


Lagna,  strength  of      ... 

iieya,  Greek  name  for  Simba^  Leo 


• .  • 


••• 


• .  • 
• .  t 


I 
I 


18 
8 


I'V  ASTBOLOatCAL  TSBVS. 


M. 


•••  •••  •••  ••• 


•  •• 


Malo^planets 

Male  signs 

Malefio  planets ...         ...         ... 

MHleiic  signs     ...    .     ... 

Measurement  of  the   Zodiacal  bigos 
Meshooranti,  10th  house 
Meta1s>  planetary  divisions  of  ... 
Mitragi-aha,    friendly  planets  ... 
Moola  trikona,  sigus  and  their  lords 
Motional  strength  of  planets 

Movable  signs     

Movable  and  immovable  signs  ... 


N. 


Naisargikabala,  natural^  relative  strength 
of  planets , 

Names,  various,  for  plan ets      

Napumsaka  graha,  hermaphrodite  planets 

Natural,  relative,  strength  of  planets 

Navamsa,  division  of  sign  into  9  parts  and 
their  lords  ... 

Neecha,  depression  signs 

Neutral  planets 

Nocturnal  signs 


••• 


•  •• 


Ch. 

Stanza. 

II 

0 

I 

11 

II 

5 

I 

11 

I 

19 

I 

18 

II 

12 

II  15  to  18 

I 

14 

II 

19 

I 

U 

I 

11 

I ••       ••* 


...         ..•        •.•        ••• 

•••       •••       •••       ••• 


P- 

Panaphara  signs,  2nd^  5th,  fth  &  11th  houses. 

Papagraha,  maleiio  planets 

Paparasi,  malefic  signs 

Paschima  rasi,  Western  signs 

Pathona,  Greek  name  for  Kannya,  Virgo 

Periodical  strength  of  the  planets     . . . 

Political  divisions  of  the  planets 

Positional  strength  of  the  planets 

Prak  rasis,   Eastern  signs 

Prishtodaya  rasis,  signs  rising  with  their  feet 

Pnrusha  graha,  male  planets 

Purusha  rasis;  male  signs . 


•  •  •        .  •  •' 

•  •  •         •  t  • 

•  •  •  • . . 
•  • . 
• . . 

•  •  •        • « • 
••  •        •  •  • 

• .  •         . .  • 


•  •         •••        ••• 

•  !'•  tt*  ••• 


II 

21 

II 

2&3 

II 

6 

II 

19 

I 

6 

I 

13 

u 

17&18 

I 

10 

I 

18 

II 

5 

I 

11 

I 

11 

I 

8 

II 

19 

II 

1 

II 

19 

I 

11 

I 

10 

II 

6 

I 

11 

^TBOLOQICAL  TEELm* 


Q.  Cli-    Stanza. 


QaadranI 8,  their  strength  '      ...     I    17&19 

Qaadruped  signs,  their  8  ren^th         I         19    • 

Quaiterly  strength  of  planets  ... II         1 9 


E. 


.  •  • 


*. 0        •  •• . 


•  •  • 


Basis.  SipBS,  names  of 
Hasis,  their  lords 
Bikshasandhiy  define!  ... 
Ritns,  planet ar J  divisioi  8  of  ... 

liupa^  shHpesi  of  planets         ...         

Bnpa,  shapes,  of   signs •••         ••> 

s. 


I 

4 

T 

6 

I 

7 

JI 

12 

11 

8  to  11 

•••  ••• 


•  •• 

of 

•••       •.•  ••• 

•••       ••#  ••• 

•••         ..•  **• 

«••  *  •  • 

».•  ••♦ 


II 

16,17 

II 

JotolS 

II 

12 

I 

9 

I 

6 

II 

8  to  It 

II 

13 

I 

4 

I 

6 

Samagraha,  nentral  planets. •• 

Satru  graha,  inimical  planets... 

Seasons,  planetarj  divisions   of 

Shadyarga,  6  modes  of  the  division  of  the 
ecliptio        ...         ... 

Shapes  of  the  signs 

Shapes  of  the  planets  ..« 

Sights  or  aspects  •£  the  planets 
^  Signs,  names  of            ... 
*  Signs,  their  lords  

Significations^  of^the  12  signs  of  Zodiac         ...      I  1^&  16 

Siraprishtodaya  rasi^  sign  that  rises  with  its 

head  and  tail         I         10 

Siroda}'a   rasis,  signs   that  rise   with  their 
heads 

Southern  signs  ... 

Sthanabala,  positional  strength  of  planets 

Sthira  rasis,  fixed  signs 

Streegraha,   female  planets^... 

Stree  rasis,  female  signs 

Strength  of  Lagna 

Subhagraha,  benefic  planets 

Sukha,  4th  house 

Sutabha,  5th  house       

Swakshetra  houses  and  their  lords 


•••        •••        •.•  ..• 

• .  •  ... 
th 

•..  «..  .. 

...  *  •  • 

•  ••  ».•  .*• 

•••  *••  •.. 

...  •..  ... 

•••                 ...  ...  *•• 


•  .  I  •  •• 


10 

11 

II 

19 

11 

11 

6 

11 

39 

II 

5 

18 

18 

6 

vi  ASTBOLOQICAL  TtBUt. 


T. 


•  t  • 

•••      •••      ••• 


•  •  • 

S» 

•  •  •      ••  •      «••      •  •  • 

••k        •••        •••        ••• 

t  •  • 


Tails,  si}jfns  tliat  riso  with  their 

•THpas,  9bh  house  

Tavuri,  Greek  name  for  Yrishabha,  Taurus  ... 

Temper,  of  planets        

Toukttbika,  Ctreek  uame  for  Dhanus^  Sagibtari. 

Triangular    signs 

Trikona>  5th  house 

Ti'ikona  rasi,  triangular  signs  ... 

TrimsHmsa,  division  of  sign  into  SO  parts 

Tritrikona,  9th  house    ... 

u. 

XJbhaya  rasij  movable  and  iiamoyable  signs...  I  11 

Uccharasi,  signs  of  exaltation  with  degrees  ...  I  13 

Upachaya  or   improving  signs  I  ]5 

Uttara  rasii,  Northern  signs      I  n 


Ch. 

StauE. 

I 

10 

I 

19 

I 

8 

11 

7. 

I 

8 

I 

6 

I 

18 

I 

6 

I 

7 

I 

19 

•*•  ...  ... 

•  •    ■    • 


Vargottamat  defined 
Yarua,  color  of   planets  . 
Varna,  color  of  Zodiacal  signs 
Vesi,  2nd  house  from  the   Sun. 

Yesma,  4th  house  

W. 

Western  signs   » •..         ...         ...      I        11 


I 

14 

I£ 

4&5 

I 

20 

I 

20 

1 

18 

THS 


BRIHT  JTAKA 


or 


VARi\HA  MlHIRA. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Definitions  and  Elementary  Principled 

(Zodiacal.) 

1.  May  the  Sun  give  us  speeohi  who.  ty  his  lighfc 
illumiuea  the  Moon,(a)  who  is  the  path  of  those  who  have 
no  rebirth,  who  is  the  Atma  of  those  who  know  the  Atma. 
who  is  the  Deya  worshipped  in  sacrificial  rites,  who  is  the 
Lord  of  the  Devas  and  of  the  Lights  of  the  sky^  Avho  is 
the  Author  of  the  origin^  growth  and  annihilation  of  the 
worlds,  who  is  sung  in  the  Vedas  in  various  waye,  who  is 
possessed  of  many  rays  and  who  forms  the  Lamp  of  the 
three  worlds* 

NOTES. 

(a)  In  connection  with  this  we  would  draw  the  atten- 
tion of  the  reader  to  what  the  author  says  on  the  subject 
of  the  Moon  receiving  light  from  the  Sun  in  Stanza  2  of 
Chapter  lY  of  his  Brihat*  Samhita,  which  runs  as  follows; 

''The  rays  of  the  Sun  falling  on  the  watery  Moon  re- 
move the  darkness  of  the  night  (on  Earth)  jusb  in  the  same 
way  as  light  reflected  from  a  mirror  (placed  in  the  Sun}  re- 
moves the  darkness  (from)  within  a  ro6m." 


Z  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [cH.  I. 

And  in  the  Veda?  we  find  the   (visible)  Moon  briefly 
defined  as  follows : 

*'  Surja  rasmischandramah.*' 
The  Moon  is  the  rays  of  the  Son. 


2.  Though  various  well  written  works  on  Astrology(a) 
the  productions  of  able  men— exist  for  the  enlighten- 
ment of  intelligent  staclents  (of  horosoop)),  I  begin 
to  construct  (this)  small  boat  (consisting)  of  stanzas 
(written)  in  various  metres  and  of  several  meanings  for 
(the  benefit  of)  persons  of  broken  attempts  to  cross  the 
vast  ocean  of  horoscopy. 

NOTES, 

(a)  Such  works  as  those  of  Parasara,  Garga^  Badara* 
yana,  Satyacharya  and  others. 


3.  According  to  some,  the  word  hora  is  a  corruption 
of  the  word  Ahoratri,  the  first  and  last  letters  (syllables) 
being  dropped.  The  science  (of  horoscopy)  treats  of  the 
efi'ects  of  the  good  and  bad  deeds  (karma)  of  men  in  their 
previous  births. 


4.  The  (twelve)  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  commencing  with 
the  firot  point  of  Aries  and  of  (the  asterism  of)  Aswani, 
and  consisting,  eaeh^  of  nine  stellar  quarters  and  forming 
a  circle^  are  respectively  the  head^  face,  breast,  heart,  belly, 
navel,  abdomen,  genital  organ^  two  thighs,  two  knees, 
two  ankles  and  the  two  feet  of  Kalapurnsha.  (The  terms) 
Basil  Kshetra,  Graha,  Riksha,  Bham,  Bhavana^  are  synony- 
mous terms* 


tH.   I.] 


IBRIHIT    JATAKA. 


8 


NOTES. 


The  foUowbg  talkie  will  l)e  nsef al  foi^  purposes  of  ready 
reference:— 


Rasi- 
Mesha 
Vrisbablia 
Mitbuna 
Kataka 
Simha 
Kanya 
Tnia 

Yriscbika 
Dhanus 
Makara 
Knmbha 
Meena 


Sign. 
...  Aries 
...  Taurus 

•  ..  Gemioi 

•  ••  Cancer 
«..  Leo 
...  Virgo 
...  Libra 
...  Scorpio 
...  Sagittari 
...  Gaprioom 
...  Aquarius 
...  Pisces 


:  Part  of  body. 
...  Head 
...  Pace 
...  Breast 
...  Heart 
...  Belly 
...  Navel 
•  ••  Abdomen 
...  Genital  organ 
«..  Two  thighs 
...  Two  knees 
...  Two  ankles 
• .  •  Two  feet 


The  twenty-seven  asterisms  are  : — 


s^A^^Krittika 

;>^n^-Rohini 

Ibe^t^^  Mrif^asirsha 

»rvafi4*-Ardra 

/)fjra€—  Funnrvasu 

jyevO'r'PuBhya 

.\^//M"'Asble8ha 

F.  Pbalgani 
TJ.  Phalguiii 

2>  e^^**yHasta 

/:;^/tA  Ohxtrtk 

y.JKih'^  Vieakha 
j)</i/'^''AnDradba 

>A^  Jyeebta 

'tJ<si  ^  Mnis 
>vtA^«>»i  ''P.  Asbadha 
"'^wp^A^ur'XJ.  Asbadha 

%  fvif-  Sraviina 

Sravisbta 
fl^V^  Btaabbisbak 
)k^^(/KH>P.  fihadrapada 

vr^4vvi4«TJ.  Bhadrapada 
)l«^/*'*H6vati 


•*• 
••* 
••• 

••• 
••• 


.•k 


0«.  /?  Arietia 

•••      85  Arietia,  and  Masca 

...  17  Taori,  Alcyone 

...  o  Tanrii  Aldebaran 

...  X  Oriooia 

*..  o  Orionia 


...  6  Gemini  Pollnx 
*  ...  o 


... 


••* 


•«• 


••• 


t  •  • 


Oancri 
•••  B  Hydrae 
...  a  Leonia,  Beguias 
...  d  Leonia 
...  ^  Leonia 
...  d  Oorvi 
...a  YirginiaSpioa 
...  o  BnotiBi  Arctuma 
...  »  Librae 
...  ^  f>corpionia 
...  a  Scorpionisi  Aritares 
...  X  Scorpion ia 
...  d  Sagittarii 
...  q  Sagittarii 
...  a  AqailaCf  Atair 
...  /?  Delpbini 
...  X  Aqnarii 
•••  c  Pega^i 

...  y  V  gaai  and  Andremodae 
(  Piaoium 


•  •: 


These  asterisms  or  lunar  mansions  are  divided  eacli 
into    four    equal  parts  known  as  Nakshatrapadas*    There 


4  BRIHAT   JATAKA#  CH.   !• 

are  therefore  108  sacli  parts  in  the  ecliptic^  and  each  sign 
contains  nine  enqh  parts  or  2^  stellar  divisions  The  first 
asterism,  Aswiui,  commences  at  the  first  point  of  Ariesy 
wliioh  is  the  star  Bevati,  about  20^  to  the  east  of  the 
Vernal  I  Equinox — (Tide  Introdaction),  so  that  the  second 
quarter    of  the  asterism  of  Krittika    commences  the  first 

point  of  Taurus.  The  third  quarter  of  the  asterism  of 
Mrigasirsha  commences  the  first  point  of  Gemini>  and  the 
fourth  quarter  of  the  asterism  of  Funarvasu  commences 
the  first  point  of  Cancerj  and  so  on. 

Each  of  the  terms  Rasi,  Kshetra,  Graha^  &o.>  means  a 
sign  of  the  Zodiac^  which  is  a  twelfth  part  of  the  heavens 
or  30^  of  the  ecliptic 

5.    Sign  Pisces  is  of  the  shape  of(a)  two  fish;  sign 
Aquarius  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man   with  a .  (water)  pot  ; 
sign  Gemini  is  of  the  shape   of  a  man  and  woman,  (the 
foime^r)  with  a  stick  and  (the  latter)  with  a  lyre,  both  seat- 
ed in  one  seat  j  sign  Sagi(tari  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man 
who  in  his  lower  parts  is  a  horse  5  sign   Capricorn  is  »f 
the  shape  of  a  crocodile    with  the  face   of  a  deer  ;  sign 
Libra  is  of  the  shape  of  a  person  with, scales  (in  his  hand)  ; 
and  (sign  Virgo  is  of  the  shape  of)  a.  virgin  in  a  boat  with 
crops  (in  one  hand)   and  a  light   (in  the  other).    The  other 
signs  resemble  in  8hape(b)  the  different  creatures  denot- 
ted  by  their  names.    The   dwelling  places   of  the   several 
signs  are  places  appropriate  to  the  several  creatures. 

,    .        NOTES. 

(a)  Sign  Pisces  is  of  the  shape  of  two  fish  lying  side 
by  side,  the  head  of  the  one  being  near  the  tail  of  the 
other. 

(b)  That  is,  Aries  (Mesha)  is  of  the  shape  of  a  ram: 
Taurus  (Vrishabha),  of  the  shape  of  a  bull }   Cancer  (Eata*. 


OH.  I.]  isRlHAT  JATAKA.  5 

ka),  of  the  shape  of  a  crab :  Leo  (Simlia)^  of  the  shape  of  a« 
lion;  and  Scorpio  (Yrischika)^  of  the  shape  of  a  scorpion. 

This  stanza  as  well  as  stanza  4  are  chiefly  useful  in 
questions  6onnected  with  horary  astrology — in  the  disco- 
very of  stolen  property  and  the  like. 

6.  Mars,  Venus,  Mercary,  the  Moon,  the  Sun,  Mer- 
cury>  Yenus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are 
respectively  the  lords  of  the  Signs,  and  of  the  Navamsns 
and  Dwadasamsas  ;  and  the  several  signs  (of  the  Zodiac 
beginning  from  Aries)  commence  respectively  with  the 
Nayamsas  of  Mesha,  Makara,  Tola  and  Kataka* 

Bix  modes  ol  diriston  of  ike  eoliptic  (860o)  for  horoscopic  purposes 
known  as  the  Shadvarga  are  mentioned  (vide  stanza  9).  These  are  Basi 
(sign)  in  which  the  ecliptic  is  divided  into  12  eqnal  parts  of  30^  each; 
(vide  stanza  4).  Hora  in  which  each  sig^n  is  divided  into  two  eqaal  parts  of 
16^  each  ^vide  stanzas  9  and  11).  Drekkana  in  which  a  si^n  is  divided 
into  three  eqaal  parts  of  10**  each  (vide  stanzas  11  and  12);  Kavamsa 
in  which  a  sign  is  divided  into  nine  eqnal  parts  of  So  20*  each ;  Dwada- 
samsa,  in  which  a  sign  is  divided  into  twelve  eqnal  parts  of  2o  80^  each  ;  . 
and  Trimsamsa*  in  which  a  sign  is  divided  into  thirty  eqaal  parts  of  a 
degree  each  (vide  stanza  7).  The  Navamstis  .*  each  sign  being  divided 
into  9  eqaal  parts  and  there  being  12  jiuoh  sig^s,  there  are  in  all  12X9 
or  108  snoh  divisions  in  the  ecliptic.  We  have  already  (vide  stanza  4) 
seen  that  the  ecliptic  contains  27x4  or  IDS  stellar  qnarters  or  Nak- 
shatrapadas  ;  it  follows  therefore  that  a  Kavamaa  is  a  Nak8hati*apada, 
that  is  one«fourth  of  a  Innar  mansion.  The  .108  Navamsas  beginning 
i^om  the  first  point  of  Aries  bear  the  same  names  as  the  twelve  signs 
of  the  Zodiac  oonnted  over  and  over  again  :  the  first  Navamsa  of  Mesha 
is  Meslia  itself ;  that  of  Vrishabha  is  Makara  ;  that  of  Mithnna  is  Tnla  •; 
and  that  of  Kataka  is  Eataka  itself.  The  same  order  holds  for  the  4 
signs  from  Simha  to  Yrischika  and  for  the  4  from  Dhaaas  to  3Ieena. 
In  other  words  the  four  sets  of  Trikona  or  triangnlar  signs  begin  with 
the  same  Navamsas  }  that  is  the  Trikona  signs  of  ' 

J /^^  ^^  Hesha,  Simha|Dh£as  begin  with  the  Navamsa  of  Meshn.     ^ 

fi^fiH^     Vrishabha,  EanSdJ^a,  Makara  begin  with  the  Navamsa  of  Makara. 

(Ivr'Y      Mi^na,  ^rafi,  KdffiStia  begin  with  the   Navamsa  of^raia;and 

yfpiiihH    EaTki,  YrisoKika,  M^a  begin  with  the  Nawansa  of  Ed^ka. 

The  Dwadasamsas  :  The  twelve  parts  into  which  each  sign  is  divided 
bear  the  same  names  as  those  of  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac.  The  name  of  the 
first  Dwadasamsa  of  a  particular  sign  is  the  name  of  the  Hign  itself.  So 
that  the  12  Dwadasamsas  of  Mesha  are  Mesha,  Vrishabha,  Mithunn,  &c., 
ending  with  Meena.  Those  of  Vrishabha  are  Vrishabha,  Mithana,  Eataka, 
&o.,  ending  with  Mesha.  Those  of  Mithuaa  are  Hithuua,  Eataka>  Simha, 
&o.,  ending  with  Vrishabha  and  80t>n« 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  I. 


The  lords  of  the  Navamsas  and  DwadaBamsas  are  the  Bame  as  the 
lorda  of  the  Basis  (signs).  These  are  mentioned  in  the  text  in  the  order 
of  the  signs.  It  will  be  found  that  the  San  and  Moon  have  each  a  house, 
while  the  other  planets  have  each  two  houses.  These  hoases  are  known 
as  Swaksbetras :  Thus 

Mars  IB  the  lord  of  Mesba  and  Yrisohika. 

Venus  is  the  lord  of  Vrisbabba  and  Tula.  t 

Mercury  is  the  lord  of  Mitbana  and  Eannya. 

Jupiter  is  the  lord  of  Meena  and  Dhanus. 

Saturn  is  the  lord  of  Kumbha  and  Makara. 

The  Moon  is  the  lord  of  Kataka,  and  the  Sun  is  the  lori  of  Simha. 

There  are  Bevoral  modes  of  oonstmcting  a  figure  of  the  heayenB.  The 
one  used  in  Southern  India  is  the  one  recommended  by  Jaimuni — the 
author  of  Astrological  Abporisms.  It  is  given  below,  and  the  reader 
is  referred  to  the  appendix  for  diagrams  relating  to  the  several  modes  of 
division  of  the  ecliptic  referred  to  above. 


Meena,  Jupiter. 

Mesha,  Mars. 

.Vrisbabha 
Venus. 

Mithuna 
Mercury, 

Kumbha,  Saturn 

1 

RASI   OHAKUA. 

• 

Kataka,  Moon. 

Ikfakara^  Saturn. 

Simha,  Sun. 

Dhanus,  Jupiter. 

Vrischika, 
Mars. 

Tula.  Venus.        ^^^J^, 

0 


7.    Five,  five,  eighty  seven  and  five  parts  (degrees) 

are  respectively  those  of  Mars^  Saturn^  Japiter)  Mercory^ 

"^         and  Yenus,  in  the   odd   signs.     In  the  even  signs  their 

'\j    order  is  reversed.    The  ends  (last  Navamsas)  of  Kataka, 

' ;) '  Vrischika  and  Meena  are  known  as  Biksha  sandbis. 

ITOTES. 

This  stanza  defines  Trimsamsas^  and  their  lords.    As 
already  observed  Trimsamsa  is   division   of  euch  sign  into 
thirty  equal 
signs  are  Mesha^ 

bha,     The  even    signs  are    Yrishabha,    Kataka,    Kannya, 
Vrischika,  Makara  and  Meena.     "^  '  '^ 

1  \\^  V^  •  ^ 


parts,   each  part   being   a  degree.    The  odd^ 
ba^  Mithuna,  Simha,  TuU,  Dhaihus  and  Knm- 


^,^^        CH.  1-3  BRIHAT    JAtAKA.  7 


T*              In  the  odd  signs  the    first  five    degrees  are   the  Trim-  '^^^ 

jl*   samas  of  Mai*s  ;  the  next  five  are  those  of  Saturn  ;  the  next  ^ 

eighb  are  those  of  Japiter ;    the  next  seven  are  those  of  ^^ 

^    Mercury  >  and  the    last  five    are  those    ofYenas.    In  the  ^' 

^ib    even  signs  the  first  five  are  those  of  Yenas ;  the  next  seven  J^ 

2.Jf  are.  those  of  Mercury  ;  the  next  eight  are  those  of  Jupiter;  n 

tbe  next  five  are  those    of  Saturn  ;  and    the    last    five  are 


30 


those  of  Mars.     The    Trimsamsa    division    is  used    by  the 
author  in  his  Chapter  relating  to  the  horoscopy  of  women. 

8.  Tbe  terms  Kriya,  Tavuri,  Jituma, '  Eulira,  Leya, 
Fathona^  Juka,  Koarpii  Toukshikay  Akokera,  Hridroga  and 
Antyabha  (are  other  names  for  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac). 

NOTES. 

All  the  above  names,  excepting  Knlira  and  Antyabha 
are  evidently  Greek  terms — a  circumstance  clearly  indica- 
ting that  the  intercourse  between  the  learned  men  of  India 
and  Hellan  was  more  than  superficial* 

9.  A  planet  is  said  to  be  in  its  Varga  if  it  be  in  its 
Brekana,  Hora,  Navamsa*  Trimsamsa,  Dwadasamsa  and 
Kshetra.  The  term  Hora  means  both  the^  rising  sign  and 
one  half  of  a  sign  oE  the  Zodiac. 

NOTES, 

These  terms  have  already  been  explained  (vide  stanza 
6). 

The  term  Kshetra  means  a  house  or  a  sign.  For  the 
Names  and  Lords  of  the  Hora  divisions  of  a  sign  vide 
Stanza  11. 

1 0.  The  signs  Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer^  Sagittari 
and  Capricorn  are  known  as  the  night  signs  ;(a)  and>  with 
the  exception  of  Geminij  they  rise  with  their  feet(&)«    The 


8  BSIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH*  I* 

other  signs  rise  with  their  heads(c)  and  are  powerful  by 
day(d).    The  two  fish  rise  by  both_(head  and  foot)(e). 

NOTES. 

(a)  Therefore  the  day  signs  are  Leo,  Virgo,  Libra, 
Scorpio,  Aquarias  and  Pisces. 

(6)  Signs  that  rise  by  their  feet  are  known  as  Prish- 
todaya  Ranis  and  these  are  Aries,  Taurus,  Cancer,  Sagittarij 
end  Capricorn.  . 

(c)  Signs  that  rise  by  their  heads  are  known  as  Siro- 
daya  Rasis,  and  these  are  Gemini,  Leo,  Virgo.  Libra,  Scor- 
pio and  Aquarius. 

(d)  Therefore  the  Prishtodaya  signs  are  powerful  at 
night. 

(e)  For  the  shape  of  the  sign  Pisces  vide  Stanza  5. 

• 

11.  The  signs  (from  Aries)  are  (by  turns)  malefic  and 
benefic^  masculine  and  feminine  (a)  and  movable,  fixed  and 
both  (movable  and  fixed) (b).  The  signs  Aries,  Taurus, 
Gemini  and  Cancer  with  their  triangular  signs  denote  each 
respectively  the  East,  South,  West  and  North(c).  The 
two  horas  of  the  odd  signs  are  respectively  the  Solar 
and  Lunar  horas,  and  the  two  of  the  even  signs  are 
respectivly  the  Lunar  and  Solar  horas.  The  lords  of  the 
Drekkanas,(d)(^of  a  particular  sign)  are  respectively  the  lords 
of  that  sign,  the  5th  sign  and  the  9th  sign, 

NOTES. 

(a)  In  other  words  thfe  odd  signs  are  all  malefic  and 
masculine,  and  the  even  signs  are  all  benefic   and  feminine. 

(b)  Aries,  Cancer,   Libra   and  Capricorn  are  movable 

signs. 

Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio  anh  Aquairus  are  fixed  signs. 

Gemini,  Virgo,  Sagittari  and  Pisces  are  both  (movable 

and  fi;iced)  and  are  also  known  as  common  signs. 


CH.  I.]  BRISAT  JATACA.  0 

(c)  Tho  Bigua  Aries,  Leo  and  Sagittari  aro^known  as 
the  Eastern  8igns« 

Tarns,  Virgo  and  Capricorn  are  Southern  signs. 
Gemini,  Libra  and  Aquarius  are  Western  signs. 
Cancer,  Scorpio  and  Pisces  are  Northern  signs.'  , 

(d)  For  example :  The  lords  of  the  three  Drekkana^ 
of  Leo  are  respectively  the  Sun  (lord  of  Leo),  Jupiter 
(lord  of  Sagittari  the  /)th  house)  and  Mars  (lord  of  Aries 
the  9th  hoase).^^,^^^'^'^  ^ 

12.  According  to  aoTne(a)  the  lords  of  the  two  horas 
of  a  aign  are  respectively  the  lords  of  the  sign  and  of  the 
11th  sign(();  and  the  lords  of  the  three  Dreklcnnas  of  a 
sign  are  respeotiyely  the  lords  of  the  sign,  tho  12th  sign 
and  the  llth  sign(c)  from  it. 

N0TB5. 

(a)  That  is,  according  to  Garga  and  men  of  his 
school.  But  the  author^  opinion  is  that  expressed  in 
stanza  II  in  which  he  is  supported  by  the  opinion  of  Satya- 
eharya. 

(6)  The  lords  of  the  two  horas  of  Sagittari,  for  in- 
stance, are  respectively  Jupiter  (lord  of  Sagittari;  and  Ye- 
nos  (the  lord  of  Libra  the  1 1th  house 

(c)  Tho  lords  of  the  three  Drekkanas  of  Sagittari,  for 
instance,  are  respectively  ^  Jupiter  (lord  of  sagittari),  Mara 
(lord  of  Scorpio  the  i2th  house)  and  Veuiis  (lord  of  Libm 
the  ilth  house).  .         . 

13.  The  Signs  Ariea,  Taurus,  Capricorn,  Virgo, 
Cancer,  Pisces  and  LibrH  are  respectively  tho  Uboha 
(exaltation)  signs  of  tho  Sun  and  other  planets.  The 
10th,  3rd,  28th,  15th,  5th,  27th,  and  20fch  are  the  degrees 
of  mniu   exaltation  of   the  several  planets.    The  7th  or  • 


10  BRIHAT  JATAU.  [CH.  I. 

oppcsite  signs  are  the  Neecba  (depression)  signs  ;  and  the 
degrees  of  main  depression  are  the  same  as  given  above. 

NOTES. 

A  planet  in  his  exaltation  sign  is  considered  as  excee- 
dingly powerfdl  and  one  in  his  depression  sign  as  excee- 
dingly weak.  The  San  and  Moon  are  also  treated  as  pla- 
nets- The  Hinda  Astrological  ordor  of  the  planets  is  the 
isame  as  the  days  of  the  week.  The  following  table  is 
given  for  convenience  of  reference. 
Planets*  Uccha  or  Exal-  Neecha  or  de*  Degree  of  main 
tatioT%  Signs,    preasion  .SignS'     Exaltation  or 

Depression, 
Libra.  10 

Scorpio.  3      * 

Cancer.  28 

Pisces-  »       15 

Capricorn.  5 

Virgo.  27 

Aries.  20 


14.  In  the  movable  and  other  signs  (a) ,  the  first,  the 
central  and  the  last  Navamsas  are  known  as  Yargottama 
positions.  Planets  in  such  positions  will  produce  good 
effects.  The  signs  LeOj  Taurus,  Aries,  Virgo,  Sagittari> 
Libra,  and  Aquarius  are  known  as  the  Moolatrikona  houses 
of  the  planets  re8pectively.(&) 

NOTES. 

(a)  The  Vargottama  places  are  :  The  first  Navamsas 
of  the  4s  movable  signs  Aries>  Cancer,  Libra,  and  Capri- 
corn. 

eTh  5th  ITavamsas  of  the  four  fixed  signs,  Taurus,  Leo, 
Scorpio  and  Aquarius. 

The  9th  Navamsas  of  the  four  movable  and  fixed  signs 
pemini,  Virgo,  Sagittari  au«l  Pisces. 


San. 

Aries. 

Moon. 

Taurus* 

Mars. 

Capplconi. 

Merourv 

.  Virgo. 

Jupiter. 

Cancer. 

Venus. 

Pisces. 

Saturn. 

Libra* 

CH.   U]  BRtHAT  JATAKl.  11 

These  Navamsas  will  be  found  to  bear  the  same  names 
as  the  signs  themselves.  For  example  :  the  first  Navamsa 
of  Aries  is  Aries ;  the  first  of  Ganoer  is  Canoer,  and  so 
forth. 

The  fifth  Navamsa  of  Taurus  is  Taurus  ;  of  Leo  is  Leo 
and  so  forth. 

,    The  ninth  Navamsa  of  Gemini  is  Gemini^    of  Virgo  is 
Virgo,  and  so  forth. 

(6)  The  following  list  contains  the  Moola  Trikona, 
signs  of  the  planets  : 


PlaneU. 

Moola  Trikona  signs 

Sun. 

Leo. 

Moon. 

Taurus, 

Mars. 

Aries. 

Mercury. 

Virgo. 

1 

Jupiter.   . 

Sagittarlr 

Venus, 

Libra. 

Saturn* 

Aquarius.    < 

•     1 


15.  The  significations  of  the  12  houses  from  the  rising 
sign  (asoendant)  are  respectively  (a  native's)  body^  family> 
brothers,  relations,  sons,  enemies,  wife,  death,  deed  of 
virtue,  avocation,  gain  and  loss  (a).  The  8rd,  6th,  lOth* 
and  11th  bouses  from  the  ascendant  are  known  as  the 
Upachaya  (improving)  signs,  but  not  so  according  to 
some. (6) 

NOTES. 

(a)    The  following  is  a  list  of  significations  of  the  seve- 
ral houses  of  the  Zodiac  from  the  ascendant* 
Ascendant  or 
1st  house.. ..Body,  fame,  limbs. 

2Qd  „     ...Family,  wealth,  eyep,  speech  truthfulness. 
Srd     II    ...Brothers)  bravery,  meals: 


12  BRIHAT   JATAKir.  [CH.   I« 

...  1 

4tli  y,  ... Relations,  education,  molLer,   ooy^B,  dwel- 
ling plaoe,  carriages  comfort. 

Sth  ,,  '...Sons,  iutelligOQcej  previous  karma. 

Cth  ,1  ^..Enemies, kinsmen,  diseases. 

7ih  „  ...Wif^i  generosity,  respect. 

Sth  J,  ...Death,  duration  of  life. 

9th  ^,     ...Deeds  of  virtue^  father,  mediciue. 

^  10th    „     ...Avocation,  knowledge,  clotbes. 
nth    „     ...Gain,  earning. 

I2th  ,'f  ...Loss,  bad  deeds,  travels. 
{h)  Gar^a  and  astrologers  of  his  school  are. of  opinion 
that  tfie  3rd.  6th,  lOth  and  1  Hh  houses  cease  to  be  Upa- 
cbaya  places  if  malefic  planets  or  planets  which  are  un- 
friendly to  the  lords  of  these  4  houses  should  either  occupy 
such  houses  or  aspect  the  same.  But  the  author  does  not 
agree  with  Garga  and  be  is  supported  in  his  views  by 
Satyacharya  and  by  Tavaneswara, 

16.  The  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac  beginning  from 
the  ascendant  are  known  technically  as  the  signs  of  (1) 
Kalpa  (power),  (2)  Sva  (wealth),  (3)  Vikrama  (prowess),  (4) 
Graha  (dwelling  place),  (5)  Pratibha  (intelligence),  (6) 
Kshata  (wound),  (7)  Maumatha  (desire),  (8)  Bandhra,  (9) 
Guru  (father  or  preceptor),  (10)  Mana  (respectability),  (II) 
Bliava  (acquisition),  (12)  Vyaya  (loss).  The  4th  and  Sth 
houses  are  known  as  Chaturasra  signs.    The  7th  house  ia 

known  as  Dyuna  and  the  10th  house  is  known  as  Ajna. 

• 

NOTES. 

A  number  of  astrological  terms  are   defined  in  this 
stanza. 


17.    The  1st,  4th,  7th  and  10th  houses  are  known  as 
Kantaka  or  Kendra  or  Ghatushtaya  houses  (quadrants  or 


CH*   I.]  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  r  18 

angles).  If  these  four  houses  should  happen  to  be  biped, 
aquatic,  ceutiped  and  quadrnped  respectively^  they  then 
possess  strength  • .  > 

NOTES. 

The  biped  signs  are :  Gemini^  Libra,  Virgo,  the  first 
half  of  Sagittari  and  Aqnarins.  ZttLoi" 

The  aquatic  signs  are :  Cancer,  the  fimt  half  of  Capri 
oorirand  Pisces. 

The  only  ceniipcd  sign  is  Scorpio. 

The  quadruped  signs  are  Aries,  Taurus,  Leo,  the  second 
half  of  fiagittari  and^of  Capricorn.  A/^/'!^X^r^/C 

18.  ^  The  houses  next  to  the  angles  are  known  as  Pana- 

f^hara  houses  and  those  next  to  them  are  known  asApok- 
ima  houses.     The  4th  house  is  known  as  Hibuka,  Ambn^ 

Snkha  and  Yesma.     The  7th   house  is  known  as  Jamitra. 

The  5th  house  is  known  as  Trikona*    The  10th  house  is 

.known  as  Meshoorana and  Karma.  , 

NOTES. 

Panaphara  and  Apoklima  are  Greek  terms. 

The  Panaphara  houses  are  the  2nd,  5th,  8th  and  11th 
houses. 

The  Apoklima  honses  are  the  3rd,  6th,  9th  and  12th 
houses*  J 

19.  If  the  lord  of  the  ascendant  or  Jupiter  or  Mercury 
should  either  occupy  it  or  aspect  it,  the  ascendant  (Lagna) 
would  become  powerful  and  not  by  other  planets.  ^Mie 
Kendra  signs  are  naturally  powerful  (a)  The  biped  signs 
are  powerful  during  the  day,  the  qualruped  signs  at  night, 
and  the  centiped  signs  at  sunrise  and  at  sunset.  The  Mana 
(measurement)  (b)  of  the  first  six  signs  from  Aries 
are  20^   24,28,  82/  36^  and  40  respectively;  and  those 


14  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  11. 

of  the  next  six  signs  are  40,  86,  82,  28,  24i  and  20  respeo- 
lively.  The  3rd  house  is  known  as  IJuschikya.  The  9th 
as  Tapas  and    Tritrikona* 

KOTKS. 

(a)  It  therefore  follows  that  Panaphara  houses  are 
less  powerful  than  the  Kendras,  and  Apoklima  houses  are 

the  weakest  houses  of  all. 

(b)  This  is  used  in  stanza  23,  Ch.  Y. 

20.  The  twelve  signs  hegianing  from  Aries  are  res- 
pectively (Aries)  red,  (Taurus)  white,  (G-emiui)of  the  color  of 
the  parrot,  (Cancer),  of  the  color  of  Patali  (trumpet  flower), 
(Leo)  black  white,  (Virgo)  variegated  in  color,  (Libra) 
black,  (Scorpio)  of  gold  color,  (Sagittari)  of  the  color  of  the 
husk  of  paddy,  (Capricorn)  white  red,  (Aquarius)  of  the  color 
of  Mongoose,  and  (Pisces)  of  the  color  of  fish.  The  signs 
are  known  as  Plava  (depressed)  in  the  direction  of  their' 
lords*  The  2nd  house  to  that  occupied  by  the  Sun  is  known 
as  Vesi. 

NOTES. 

(a)    For  the  use  of  this  vide  stanza  21>  Ch.  Y. 

CHAPTER  II. 

Definitions  and  Elementary  principles  continn* 

ed.— (Planetary) 

'1.  To  the  Kalapurusha,  the  Sun  is  the  soul,  the  Moon 
is  the  mind.  Mars  is  strength,  Mercury ][is  speech,  Jupiter  is 
knowledge  and  health,  Venus  is  desire,  and  Saturn  is  soitow* 
Of  the  planets  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  kings,  Mars  is  Qene* 
ral,  Mercury  is  the  first  prince, '  Jupiter  and  Yenus  are 
utt  sellers  and  Saturn  is  servant* 


OH.   II.J  BBIBAT  JATAKA.  l3 

2.  Hell  IS  the  Sun  ;  Seetharasmi  is  tBe  Moon  ;  Hrmna, 
Yiti  Cna,  Bodhana  and  Indupatra  (Son  of  Moon)  are  the 
names  of  Morcmy  ;  Ara,  Vakrw,  Krnradrik»  Avaneya  (son 
of  Earth)  are  the  names  of  Mare;  Konn,  Manda^  SuryaputrA 
(son  of  the  Sun)  and  Asita  (the  black  planet)  are  the  names 
of  Saturn. 

8.  Jeeva^  Angiras^i  Sarngnrn  (the  preceptor  of  the* 
Devas)^  Vachasampati^  Ijya  are  the  names  of  Jupiter;  Sukra, 
BhrigUj  Bhrigusutai  Situ  cthe  white  planet), Asphnjit,  are  the 
names  of  Venus ;  Tama  (darkuess)^  Agu  and  Asura  are  the 
names  of  Rahu  (the  Moon's  ascending  node) ;  Sikhi  is  the 
name  of  Ketn  (the  Moon'^  descending  node).  Terms 
synonymous  with  the  above  should'  also  be  accepted 
(as  the  names  of  the  several  planets)* 

4.  The  Sun  is'of  a  red  and  dark-brown  color;  the 
Moon  is  white  ;  Mars  is  not  of  a  tall  figiirct   and  is  both  red 

and  white ;  Mercury  is  green  like  the  color  of  the  bent 
grass  ;  Jupiter  is  yellow  like  molten  gold ;  Venus  is  neither 
very  white  nor  very  black,  and  Saturn  is  black.  ,    , 

KOTBS. 
The  (^olor  of  a  person  will  be  that  of  the  planet  most 
powerful  at  the  time  of  his  birth, 

*         .■     •  -        •       -.   ■      .  ,   •      ;:  ■••  ■,  * 

'  •         •    •  ■  •  ■  .      •       .  I.  '  , 

•  * 

6.  The  Sun  presides  over  copper  color;  the  Moon 
over  white  color;  Mars  over  red  color;  Mercury  evergreen 
color ;  Jupiter  over  yellow  color ;  Venus  over  a  mixture  of 
various  colors ;  and  Saturn  over  black  color*  (a) 

The    Sun   IS    Agni ;  the  Moon    is  Varnna;  Mars  is 
Subbramania; Mercury  is  Vishnu  ;  Jupiter  is  In dra ;  Venus 
is  Indrant  (Indra's  wife) ;  and  Sa  turn  is  Brahma  (&)' 

'  The  Sun  presides  over  east ;  Venus,  south-east ;  Mars 
south;  Bahu  sotith-west;  Saiurnwest;  the  Moon  north* 
west;  Mercury  north  ;  Jupiter  north-east*  (/•) 


IK  bbihaT  jataka.^  [ch.  If. 

The  waning  Moon,  the  Sun^Mara,  Saturn  and  Mercury 
when  in  conjunction  with  any  of  these  are  malefio 
planets  (Jy 

NOTES. 

(a)  Tliese  are  useful  in  ascertaining  the  color  of  stolen 
articles  and  in  determining  the  color  of  the  flowers  to  be 
used  in  the  worship  of  the  planets. 

{!))  From  the  powerful  planet  at  the  time  of  one's  birth* 
it  can  be  ascertained  which  particular  Deva  a  person  would 
worship. 

(c)  .  These  are  useful  in  determining  the  position  of 
the  entrance  of  the  delivery  room  of  a  woman  and  iu  dis 
covering  the  airectiou  of  escape  of  thieves. 

(d)  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Mercury  when  in  conjunction 
with  either  of  these,  are  benefic  planets* 

6.  Mercury  and  Saturn  are  hermaphrodite  planets  (a); 
the  Mqou  and  Yenus  are  female  planets^  and  the  rest  (b) 
are  male  plieinets.  .  Mars  is  fire;  Meroury  is  earth  ;  Jupiter 
is  akas  (ether)  ;  Yenus  is  water;  and  Saturn  is  air.(cj 

'    I  NOTES. 

(a)  Meronry  is  female  hermaphrodite  and  Saturn  ia 
male  hermaphrodite. 

(b)  That  is,  the  Sun^  Mars  and  Jupiter  are  mala 
planets. 

(c)  Also  the  Sun  is  fire  and  the  Moon  water. 

7.  Yenus  and  Jupiter  are   Brahmins  ;  Mars  and  the 

Sun  are   Kshatrijas  ;  the   Moon  is  a  Yysya  ;  Meroury  is  a 
Sudra  ;  and  Saturn  is  a  Chandala. 

The  Moon^  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  are  of  Satwaguna 
(good  temper) ;  Meroury  and  Yenus  are  of  Rajoguna  (pas- 
sionate temper)  :  Mars  and  Saturn  areof  Tamoguna  (dark 
temper) 


'.J* 


CH.  It.]  BBIHAT  iTAtAki.  1!^ 

8.  The  Sun  tiaa  Bomewbat  yellow  eyefi^  ie  of  the  Iieight 
of  the  length    of  the  two  atma  stretched  outj    of  bilious 

nature  and  with  very  little  hair  on  his  head. 

■  .    ■. .        ■'.■.■,'•• 

The  Moaa  has  a  thin  and  a  round  body,  id 
of  an  exceedingly  windy  and  :  phlegu^atic  nature,  is 
learned  and  has  a  soft  voice  and  beautiful  eyes. 

9.  Mars  has  sharp  and  cruel  eyes  and  a  young  body^ 
is  generous^  of  bilious  nature^  of  imsteady  mindj  and  has  a 
narrow  ndddle* 

Mercury  has  an  impediment  in  his  speech^  is  fond  of 
joke,  and  is  of  a  bilious,  windy  and  phlegmatic  nature. 

10.  Jupiter  has  a  big  body,  (a)  yellow  hairs  and  eyeSi 
high  intellectual  powers,  and  a  phlegmatic  nature. 

Venus  leads  a  comfortable  life,  has  a  beautiful  body,  fair 

eyes,  a  windy  and  phlegmatic  nature,  and  black  cnrliog 
hairs. 

'    NOTM  - 

(a)  Jupiter  is  the  biggest  of  all  planets,  and  tho 
ancient  Hindus  were  aware  of  it  centuries  ago* 

11.  Saturn  is  lazy,  has  eyes  of  gold  color,  a  thin  and 
tall  body,  large  teeth,  stiff  hair,  and  is  of  a  windy  nature* 

Saturn  is  strong  in  muscles,  the  Sun  in  bones,  the 
Moon  in  blood,  Mercuiy  in  skin,  Yenus  in  semen,  Jupiter  ia 
flesh,  and  Mard  in  the  marrow  of  the  bones. 

12.  The  Sun  presides  over  the  place  of  worship ;  tho 
Moon  over  wells  ;  Mars  over  the  fire  place  j  Mercury  over 
play  groilndd,*' Jupiter  over  the  store  room;  Venus  over 

'^•bed  roomi  and  Saturn  over  places  whoro.'swoopiogs  arq 
^athdred. 

The  garment  of  the   Sun  is  of  thick  thread;  that  of 

the  Moon  is  new ;  that  of  Mara  is  pi^tly  burnt ;  that   of 


}8  BRIHAT  JATAKa:  [oH-  U, 

Mercury  is  wet ;  that  of  Jupiter  is  somewhat  used  that 
of  Yenas  is  strong  ;  an<)  that  of  Saturn  is  torn. 

The  Sun  presides  over  copper ;  the  Moon  over  gems  ; 
Mars  oyer  gold;  Mercury  over  brass ;  Jupiter  over  silver  ;(a) 
Venus  over  pearls  ;  and  Saturn  over  iron. 

When  either  Saturn  is  in  the  ascendant  or  when  his 
Drekkana  is  rising,  the  season  denoted  is  Sisira— January 
and  February. 

When  either  Venus  is  in  the  aBcendanti  or  when  his 
Drekkana  is  rising,  the  season  denoted  is  Vasantha  (Spring) 
*— March  and  April. . 

Similarly  in  the  case  of  the  Sun  or  Mars,  the  season 
denoted  is  Greeshma  (Summer) — May  and  June.  lu  the 
case  of  the  Moon,  the  season  in  Varsha  (Winter)— July,  and 
August*  In  the  case  of  Mercury  stheeason  is  Sarat— - 
September  and  October.  And  in  the  case  of  Jupiter  the 
season  is  Hemauta — ^November  and  December. 

NOTES. 

(a)  When  Jupiter  is  in  his  house.  He  presides  over 
gold, 

13.  All  the  planets  aspect  the  8rd  and  10th  houses 
with  a  quarter  sight,  the  5th  and  9th  houses  with  half  a 
sight,  the  4th  aud  8th  ^houses  with  three-quarters  of  a 
sight,  and  the  7th  house  with  a  full  sight ;  but  Saturn,  as- 
pects the  Srd  aud  10th  houses  with  a  full  sight;  Jupiter 
aspects  the  5th  and  9th  houses  with  a  full  sight,  and  Mara 
aspects  the  4th  aud  8th  houses  with  a  full  sight. 

NOTBS- 

Suppose  A  to  be  a  point  in  the  ecliptic  occupied  by  an 
aspecting  planet ;  divide  the  eoliptic  into  12  equal  pai'ts  of 
30®  each,  beginning  from  A.  So  that  the  12  points  of  divi- 
sion will  be  those  respectively  marked  by  A>  30°,  60  »  90° 
120%  350%  180%  210%  240%    270%  800%  and   330%  and 


CH.  II-l  BRIHAt  JkTkKkl  10 

m 

for  purposes  of  planetary  aspects,  these  points  are  respect-^ 
tively  the  middle  points  of  the  Ist,  2nd,  3rd.  4th^  &c.  to  li 
houses.  80  that  a  planet  at  A  aspeots  with  a  quarter  sight 
the  middle  points  of  the  3rd  and  lObh  houses,  i.  0.,  the 
points  marked  60^  and  370^  respectiyely ;  similary  it  as* 
pects  with  a  half  sight  points  marked  120®  and  240® 
with  three-quarters  of  a  sight  points  marked  90®  and  210<=» ; 
and  with  a  fall  sight  point  marked  180^*  The  degree  of 
aspects  for  other  places  mnst  be  determined  by  proportion 
or  rule  of  three,  from  the  degree  of  aspects  of  the  next  points 
before  and  behind.  As  regards  the  special  aspects  of  Sa-- 
turn,  Jupiter  and  Mars,  a  similar  course  should  be  adopted- 
But  if  one  planet  aspeots  another  planet,  then  subtract  the 
longitude  of  the  former  from  that  of  the  latter^  t.  e.,  take 
the  distance  between  the  two  planets  ia  degree  and  calcu- 
late the  degree  of  aspect  as  stated  above. 

14.  The  Sun  indicates  six  months;  the  Moon  two 
Ghatikas  or  forty-eight  minutes;  Mara  a  day;  Mercury 
two  months  ;  Jupiter  a  month ;  Venus  a  fortnight ;  and  Sa** 

turn  a  year. 

The  Sun  presides  over  pungent  flavor  ;  the  Moon  over 
salt  flavor  ;  Mars  over  acerbity  j  Mercury  over  mixed  fla- 
vor ;  Jupiter  over  sweetness ;  Venus  over  sourness  ;  and 
Saturn  over  bitterness. 

15.  According  to  some  Jupiter  is  the  friend  of  the 
Son  ;  Jupiter  and  Mercury  are  the  friends  of  the  Moon  ; 
Venus  and  Mercury  are  the  friends  of  Mars*  The  Moon, 
Mars,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn  are  the  friends  of  Mer« 
cnry.  The  Sun/  the  Moon,  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn, 
are  the  friends  of  Jupiter.  Mars^  Mercury,  Jupiter  and 
Saturn  are  the  friends  oE  Venus.  Mercury,  Jupiter  and 
Venus  are  the  friends  of  Saturnfa).  But  according  to 
Sat}  acharya  a  plane t^s  friends  are  the  lords  of  the  2pd 
12tb,  5thy  9th,  8th,  and  4th    houses  from  his  Moolatrikoua 


20  BRIHAT    JATAKAJ  [cH.  II. 

3ign  aa  well  as  the  lord  of  the  eitaltation  sign   of   soch 
planefcf  provided  they  do  not  conflict  with  the  lords  of  the  ' 
remaining  hon8es.(&}i 

NOTES. 

(a)    The  other  planets  are  the  enemies. 

(V)  The  same  may  be  expressed  otherwi^ie :  the  lords 
of  the.remaining  houses  are  the  foes  of  a  planet,  provided 
they  do  not  conflict  with  the  lords^of  the  seven  houses  des- 
cribed above.  Patting  the  two  together  we  get  the  fol- 
lowing resnlts : 

(1).  Those  lords  of  the  seven  honsea  who  may  not  at 
the  same  time  be  the  lords  of  the  remaining  houses  are  the 
friends  of  the  particalar  planet. 

(2)  Those  lords  of  the  latter  houses  who  may  not  at 
the  same  time  be  the  lords  of  this  former  houses  are  the  foes 

•*  Ik 

of  the  particular  planet.  ' 

(3)  And  those  who  may  be  the  lords  of  both  are 
neither  the  friends  nor  the  foes  of  the  particular  planet. 

Following  the  above  rulej  the  author  himself  gives  for 
each  planetj  his  friends^  foes,  and  neutrals  in  the  following 
two  stanzas.    (Vide  note  at  the  end  of  stanza  17).- 

16.  Saturn  and  Yenns  are  the  enemies  of  the  Sun^ 
Mercury  is  his  neutral^  and  the  rest  are  his  friends. 

I 

The  Sun  and  Mercary  are  the'  friends  of  the  Moon  and 
the  rest  are  her  neutrals,  (a) 

'  The  Sun^  the  Moon,  and  Japiter  are  the  friends  of 
Mars;  Mercury  is  his  enemy,  and  Venus  and  Saturn  are Jiis 
neutrals. 

The  Sun  and  Venus  are  the  friends  of  Mercury  ;  the 
Moon  is  his  enemy,  and  the  rest  are  his  neutrals. 

17.  Mercury  and  Venus  are  the  enemies  of  Jupiter  ; 
Saturn  is  his  neutral)  and  the  rest  are  his  friends. 


CH.   II  ]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  21 

Meronry  iiDd  Saturn  aro  the  friends  of  Venus  ;  Mars 

and  Japiter  are  her  neutrals*  and  the  rest  are  her  enemies- 
Venus  and  Mercury  are  the  friends  of  Saturn  ;  Jupiter 

is  his  neutral,  and  the  rest  are,  his  enemies*(&) 

Thus  have  I  stated  oyer  .  again,  at  length  the  views  of 

Satyacharya  regarding  the  natural  or  permanent  frienship, 

enmity  and  heuirality  among  planets* 

NOTES. 

(a)    The  Moon  has  no  enemies. 

(6)  We  will  now  examine  how  the  author  arrived  at 
the  three  results  given  in  the  last  two  stanzas.  Take  the 
oas^  of  the  Sun.  His  Moolatrikona  house  is  Leo.  (Vide 
stanza  14.)  The  2nd>  12fcfa^  5th,  9th,  8th,  and  4th  houses 
from  Leo  are  irespeotively  Virgo,  Cauoer,  Sagittari,  Ariea, 
Pisces  and  Scorpio.  The  exaltation  houses  of  the  Sun  is 
Aries.  The  lords  of  all  these  houses  are  respectively  Mer- 
cury^ the  Moon,  Jupiter,  Mars^  Jupiter^  Mar  and  Mars 
or  dropping  the  repetitions,  we  get,  Mercury,  Moon  Jupiter 
and  Mars.  .  Of  the  7  houses  Aries  being  repeated,  we  have 
been  dealing  with  only  six  houses.  -The  other  six  houses 
of  the  Zodiac  are  Leo,  Libra>  Capricorn,  Aquarius,  Taurus 
and  Gemini.  Their  lords  are  respectively  the  Sun,  Venus, 
Saturn,  Saturn.  Venus  and  .Mercury,  or  dropping  the  repe- 
titions, and  also  the  Sun^  we  get  Venus,  Saturn  and  Mer- 
cury. We  will  compare  these  with  the  lords  of  the  former 
iset  of  houses,  viz,  Mercury,  Moon,  Jupiter,  and  Mars.  We 
find  that  Mercury  is  the  only  planet  occuring  in  both  tho 
lists.  It  is  therefore  the  Sun^s  neutral.  Venus  and  Sa- 
turn are  his  enemies,  and  the  Moon,  Mars  and  Jupiter  are 
his  friends.  And  so  with  the  other  planets. 

18.  Planets  that  occupy  the  2nd,  12th,  Uth,  3rd,  10th 
and  4th  houses  from  a  particular  planet  are  the  friends  of 
that  planet  and  the  rest  are  his  enemies /or  tho  time.  Ac- 
cording to  some,  the  planets  that  occupy  the   exaltation 


22 


BRIHAT  JATAEi. 


[oh.   IK 


aign  of  a  partioular  planet  are  also  the  friends  of  tliat  pla- 
net. Oombining  together  the  three  natural  relations  (vido 
stanzas  16  and  17)  with  the  two  relations /or  the  time  now 
given^  we  may  determine  the  five  following  relations  exist* 
ing  between  planets :  Atimifcra  (great  friend)^  Mitra 
(friend)^  Sama  (neutral),  Satru  (enemy)  and  Atisatra, 
(great  enemy.) 

NOTES. 

Btanzas  16  and  17  relate  to  the  three  relations  of  per' 
manent  friendship,  neutrality  aud  enmity.  Stanza  18  re* 
lates  to  the  two  relations  of  temporary  friendship  and  en^ 
xnity.  Combining  the  two  together  we  get  the  following 
results. 

Uuder  Stanza 
18. 
Mitra.  = 

Satru.  === 

Mitra*  =: 
Satru.  = 
Satru.  = 

19.  A  planet  has  sthanabala  (local  or  positional 
strength)  when  in  his  exaltation  sign/a)  friendly  8ign^(&) 
Bfekkana/c)  in  his  NavamsajCd)  or  in  his  Kshetra,  house.(a) 
y^A  />'  Mercury  and  Jupiter  are  powerful  when  in  theEastC/)  or 
<f ising  sign.  The  Sun  and  Mars  are  powerful  when  on  the 
south  or  tenth  sign.  Saturn  is  powerful  when  in  the  West 
or  setting  sign^  aud  the  Mooa  aud  Venus  are  powerful 
when  in  the  North  or  the  4th  sign  (Patala). 

NOTES. 

I.  (13). 

II.  16  to  18. 
L  11  and  12. 
I.  6. 
1.6. 


Under  Stanzas 

16&17 

Mitra* 

+ 

Satru. 

+ 

Sama. 

+ 

Sama. 

+ 

Mitra* 

+ 

Besult. 

Atimitra« 

Atisatrn. 
Mitra. 
Satru. 
Sama. 


(a) 

(h) 
(c) 
(d) 


vide 


99 
1) 


99 


OH.   II.]  fiRHlAt    JATAlCA.  23 

•  {f)  that  18  :  they  then  possess  Dlkbala.  Aooording 
to  some  oomcneatators^  Mercury  and  Jupiter  are  powerful 
when  in  the  Eastern  triangular  signs  of  Aries^  Leo  and 
Sagittari.  The  Sun  and  Mars  are  powerful  when  in  the 
Southern  triangular  signs  of  Taurus,  Virgo  and  Capricptn. 
Saturn  is  powerful  when  in  the  Western  triangular  signs,  of 
Oermini^  Libra  and  A^quarius  i  and  the  Moon  and  Venaa 
are  powerful  when  in  the  Northern  triangular  signs  o£  Can- 
cer, Scorpio  and  Pisces, 


20*  The  Sun  and  the  Moon  possess  ChesJUahata 
(motional  strength)  when  in  any  of  the  six  signs  from 
Makara.  The  other  planets  possess  it  when  in  their  retro- 
gi*ade  motion  or  when  in  conjunction  with  the  Moon 
(Samagama)  or  when  in  their  greatest  brillianoy  or  when 
they  happen  to  be  the  northern  planets  in  planetary 
conjunction  (Yudha). 

21.  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Saturn  possess  Kalahala 
(temporal  strength)  at  night ;  Mercury  possesses  it  both 
day  and  night;  and  the  other  planets(a)  possess  it  by  day* 
The  malefic  planets  possess  it  during  the  waning  moon 
(Krishna  paksha)  and  the  benefio  planets  during  the  wax- 
ing moon  (Snkla  paksha).  Also  each  planet  has  it  in  hia 
year,  month,  day  and  hour. 

Saturn^  Mars^  Mercary,  Jupiter,  Tenus  the  Moon  and 
the  Sun  are  each  naturally  stronger  than  the  immediately 
preceding  planet  in  the  order  stated. (6) 

NOTES. 

(a)    That  is,  ths  Sun,  Jupiter,  #-«-^^^^  /Cc^.--^--^ 

(6)     Such  strength  is  known  as  Naisargikahala. 

Before  applying  the  astrological  truths  contained  in 
the  subsequent  pages,  the  reader  must  consider  the  strength 
or  weakness  of  each  house^  of  its  Lord^  and  of  the  planets 


24 


BRIdAT   JATAKA* 


CH.   tU 


occapying  or  aapecting  suoli  bouse*  For  these  and  various 
other  purposes  it  will  not  do  to  have  a  mere  Rasi  Ohakra  or 
Navainsa  Chakra  to  represent  roughly  the  planetary  posi** 
tious.  The  actual  longitudes  (sphuta)  of  the  planets  and 
of  Lagna  from  Revati  should  be  known. 


on.  8.^  WIHAS  UTAKA.  U 

r  CHAPTER  IH. 

On  An! val  and  Y iobtablb  HoBosoopr. 

1.  If,  at  the  timeof  birth'^Ca),  the  inale^^TaiQets  (&) 
be  powerful  (c),  the  benefio  planets  ((2)  weak,  and  one  of  the 
hermaphrodite  planets  (e) .  either  be  in  one  of  the  Kendras 
(angles)  (/)  or  aspect  the  Lagna  (ascendant)  ;  the  creature 
^orn  will  be  that  indicated  by  the  particular  DwadasanisaQg') 
which  the  Moon  might  then  occupy  (h).       • 

Notes, 

(a)  Or  at  the  time  of  query,  adds  the  Commentator. 

-     (b)  Foi!  the  masculine  planets,  vide  I r.  6. 

(c)  For  the  strength  of  the  planets,  vide  IL  1 9,20  &  2 1 , 

(d)  For  the  benefic  planets,  vide  II.  5*     ' 

(e)  For  the  hermaphrodita  planets,  vide  II.  6* 
(/;  For  the  Kendras  or  angles,  vide  I.  17# 

(g)     For  Dwadasamsa,  vide  I.  6.   .  ■ 

(h)    For  instance,   suppose  at   the   time  of   birth  the 

Moon  occupies  the  20^  of  Leo.     As  a  Dwadasamsa  contains 

'2|  degrees,  the  21^  of  Leo  is  the  ninth  Dwadasamsa  ofLeo* 

As  the  names  of  the   Dwadasumsas  of  Leo  begin  from  Leo, 

the  ninth  l)wadasamsa  is  that  of  Pisces.     The  creature  boirn 

will  therefore  be  a  fish. 

•      ^^  •  ■        •        «  •       »       •  .       .  __  •■  ^ 

Besides,  the  number  of  the  ofispring  will  be  that  repre- 
'sented  by  the  number  of  Dwadasamsas   passed  over  by  the 
'  Moon.      Of  'these   the  number  of  odd   Dwadasamsa  will 
^  represent  the  male  issue,  and  the  number  of  even  Dwada- 
samsas  will  represent  the   female  issues;  the  number  that 
will  perish  immediately  after  birth  will  be  that  of  the  num- 
ber of  the   Dwadasamsas  that   might  be  occupied  by  tlio 
^  malefic  planets 'or  that  might  otherwise  become  weak.  -' 
N.B. — The  reader  will  in  future  kindly  refer  to  the 

table  of  reference  published  after   the  Introduction  for  the 
.meaning  of  an}^  term»  •     •     -     ,,"      4    • 


2.  If  the  malefio  planets  occapy  ilieir  Navamsas  and 
be  powerful^  and  if  (at  the  Barae  time)  the  Lagna  (rising 
sign)  bo  other  than  haman(a)^  the  birth  will  bo  that  of  a 
lower  animal  as  before(&)t 

Notes. 

(a)  The  rising  should  be  other  than  Gemini^  Tirgo, 
Librsjthe'seoond  half  ofSagittari  and  Aquurius. 

(6)  That  is,  the  creature  will  be  that  represented  by 
the  Bwadasamsa  which  the  Moon  might  then  occupy* 


J 


3.    In  the  case  of  quadrupeds  Aries  is  the  head  ;  Taurus 
the  face  and   neck;  Gem ini^  the  forelegs   and  shoulders ; 
Cancerj  the  back ;  LeO|  the  breast ;  Virgo,  the  sides  ;  Libra, 
the  belly ;   Scorpioj   the  anus ;   Sagittari,  the  hind  legs  ,* 
Capricorn,  the  penis  or  testicle  >  Aquaiius,   the  buttocks 
and  Pisces,  the  tail. 

Notes. 

In  the  case  of  birds  the  wings  stand  for  the  forelegs. 
This  stanza  will  also  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  color  or 
wounds  of  particular  parts  of  the  creature'^  body. 


4.  If  there  be  any  planet  in  the  rising  sign,  the  color 
o{  the  creature  will  be  that  of  the  planet  itself  ;  if  not  the 
color  will  be  that  of  the  planet  aspecting  the  rising  sign  ; 
and  if  no  planets  aspect  the  rising  sign  the  color  will  be 
ih^t  of  the  rising  Navamsa.  The  number  and  variety  of 
colors  will,  be  that  of  the  planets  occupying  or  aspecting 
the  rising  sign  (a).  The  number  of  stripes  on  the  back  of 
the  creature  will  be  that  of  the  planets  occupying  the 
seventh  honse^ 

Notes. 
(a)    The  color  of  the  powerful  planet  will  predominate 


CC.   3.]  BBIHAT   OATAKA.  25 

5.  Ifeither  a  Pakshidrekkftna  (a)  or  a  Cbaranavamsn  (6) 
or  a  Navamsa  of  Mercury(<?)  slionld  rise  and  bo  occupi- 
ed by  powerful  planetf ,  tho  oreature  born  would  bo  a  land 
bird  if  the  rising  Drekkana  or  Navamsa,  be  eitlier  occupied 

or  aspected  by  Saturn  ;  and  a  water  bird  if  it  be  occupied  or 
aspected  by  the  Moon. 

Nt  03 

(a)  These  are  the  second  Drekkana  or  degrees  from 
]1  to  20  of  Gemini,  the  first  Drekkna  or  degrees  from  1  to 
10  of  Leo,  the  second  Drekkana  of  Libra  and  the  first  Drek- 
kana of  Aquarius. 

(6)  Ohara  or  movable  Navamsas  go  by"  tho  samo 
names  as  the  Chara  or  movable  signs. 

(c.)  The  Navamsas  of  Mercury  are  those  of  Gemini 
and  Virgo. 

6.  If  the  riBing  sign,  tho  Moon,  Jupiter  and  tho 
Sun  should  bo  weak,  they  indicato  tho  birth  of  a  tree  ; 
such  tree  will  be  either  a  land  tree  or  a  water  tree  accord- 
ing as  the  rising  Navamsa  is  one  of  land  or  water  (a).  Tho 
number  of  trees  will  be  tho  number  of  signs  by  which 
the  lord  of  the  ascendant  Navarasa  has  receded  from  the 
rising  8ign(&). 

Notes. 

(a)  Tho  wates  Navamsas  are  tho?»e  of  Cancer,  tho 
second  half  of  the  Navamaa  of  Makara  and  the  Navamsa  of 
Pisces.     The  other  Navamsas  are  those  of  land. 

{b)  For  instance  :  suppose  the  10°  of  Leo  to  rise,  tho 
rising  Navamsa  is  that  of  Gemini  ;  it  is  a  land  Navamsa. 
Tho  tree  will  therefore  bo  one  growing  on  dry  laud.  Tho 
lord  of  Gemini  is  Mercury.     Suppose   ilercury   to   occupy 


26  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  4 

SiigUtarl  at  the  timo.     Prom  Leo   to    Sagittari   is  5  signs. 
The  number  of  trees  will  tliereforo  bo  5. 

Again,  if  the  lord  of  tho  ascendant  Navamsa  should  be 
either  in  tho  exaltation  sign  or  retrograde  in  his  motion, 
the  number  already  obtained  should  bo  troblcd  ;  but  if  ho 
should  be  in  his  Vargottamabhaga  or  in  his  own  NavamSa 
or  Sign  or  Drokkann^  such  number  should  bo  doubled.  For 
instance  :  in  tho  instance  cited  above,  if  Mercury  shonUl 
either  be  retrograde  in  motion  and  occupy  his  exaltation 
sign,  namely,  Virgo,  the  number,  viz.,  two  from  Leo  should 
be  trebled-  This  will  give  us  six.  But  if  Mercury  should 
occupy  the  last  Na\amsa  of  Libra,  (one  of  his  Navamsas) 
the  number  is  8X2=0.  If  he  should  occupy  Gemini  the  num- 
ber is  11 X  2=22  ;  and  if  ho  should  occupy,  for  instance,  tho 
Becond  Drekkana  of  sigh  Taurus,  tho  number  is  2  x  10=20. 

7.  If  the  lord  of  tho  ascendant  Navamsa  be  the  Sun(a), 
the  tree  will  be  one  strong  within  ;  if  Saturn,  the  tre® 
will  be  an  ugly  one  ;  if  the  Moon,  it  will  bo  n  milky  tree  ; 
if  Mars,  a  thorny  tree  ;  if  Jupiter,  a  fruit  tree  ;  if  Meronry> 
a  fruitless  tree  ;  if  Venus,  a  flower  tree ;  if  the  Moou 
again,  au  oily  tree  ;  and  if  Mar^^,  a  tree  of  sour  taste. 

Notes. 

(a)  The  conditions  given  in  the  lasf)  stanza  remaining 
tho  same* 


8.  If  the  lord  of  the  ascendant  Kavomsa  be  a  bene- 
fio*planet  occupying  a  malefic  sigu(a),  tho  tree  will  be  a 
superior  ono  growing  on  a  bad  ground  ;  if  otherwise,  tho 
reverse  will  be  the  case  (6)  ;  tho  number  of  trees  is  also 
the  number  of  Navamsas  by  which  the  lord  of  the  ascen- 
dant Navamsa  has  receded  from  his  Navamsa, 


0H«   4.]  BtllHAT   SAXHItA'  27 

Notes. 

(a).  The  other  coDdltions  given  ia  stnDza  6  remaining 
the  same.  :  ,  ^  ^ 

(?;).  Tliat  is,  if  the  lord  oF  the  ascendant  Nayamsa  be 
malefic  planet  occupying  a  beneBc  house^  the  tree  will  bb- 
an  inferior  one  growing  on  a  good  ground. 


CHAPTER  IV* 
On  Nishbka  Kala  on  Tbb  time  of  Conception* 

1.  The  menses  that  appear  monthly,  because  of  Mars 
and  the  Moon  (a)  (bring  about  conception)  when  the  Moon 
is  in  one  of  the  Anunpachaya  signs(/>).  If  the  Moon  be  other- 
wise (i*)  and  be  aspected  by  a  benefio  male  planet(d)j  there 
will  be  sexual  union  between  a  woman  and  her  husband. 

Notes* 

(a)  Menses  appear  in  women  whenever  the   Moon  is 
.aspected  by  Miirs>  that  is  especially  when  the   Moon   occu- 
pies the  4thj  7th  or  the  8th  house  from   Mars.     In  connec- 
tion with  this  subject  the  author  of  Saravali  says  : 

*<The    Moon  is  water  ;  Mars  is  fire;  a  mixture  of  water 
•  and  fire  is  bile  ;  when  the  bile  mixes  with   the  bloody  men- 
strual discharge  occurs.^' 

(b)  Ifj  when  aspected  by  Mars,  the  Moon  happens 
to  occupy  one  of  the  Annpachaj^a  signs  in  the  horoscope  or 
nativity  of  the  woman,  at  the  time  of  the  appearance  of 
the  mensem,  conception  will   follow.     The   Upachaya  signs 

,  arq  the  3rd^  6th^  10th  and  the  11th  houses  from   the  ascen- 
dant ;  and  the  other  signs  arc  known  as  Anupachaya  signs. 

(o).  That  is  from  the  time  the  woman  bathes  on  the 
4th  dayj  when  the  Moon  reaches  one  of  the  Upachaya 
bouses  in  the  horoscope  or  nativity  of  the  husband. 


123  BBIdAT  JATA^A.  [OH   .8, 

(jl).  Tliore  will  be  sexual  union  between  the  husband 
and  wife  if  the  Moon,  is  pspoc^ed  by  Jupiter  when  power- 
ful.    The  Commentator  adds  as  follows  : 

''If  the  Moon  is  aspeoted  by  the  Sun^  the  woman  will 
.  have  sexual  union  with  an  officer  of  the  king  j  if  aspccted 
by  Miirs,  then  with  a  voluptuary  ;  if  aspeoted  by  Mercury, 
then  with  a  person  of  fickle  mind  ;  if  aspeoted  by  Venus, 
then  with  a  beautiful  person;  if  aspeoted  by  Satum>  then 
with  a  servant;  and  if  aspeoted  by  several  malefio  planets^ 
the  woman  will  become  a  harlot." 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  sexual  union, .  the  setting  sign 
be  either  occupied  or  aspccted  by  malefic  planets,  such 
i^nion  will  be  attended  with  anger,  and  if  by  benefic  planets, 
it  Will  be  attended  with  fflay  and  laughter. 

Notes* 

The  Commentator  adds  that   if  the  setting  sign   be 
occupied  or  aspeoted  by  both  malefic  and    benefio  p]anetS| 
-the union  will  be  attended  with  both  joy  and  displeasure, 

* 

3.  If,  at  the  time  of  sexaal  union,  the  Sun,  the  Moon, 
Venus  and  Mars  be  in  their  Navamsas(a)>  or  if  Jupiter 
ocoupy  the  rising  sign  or  the  5th  or  9th  sign  from  itj  such 
union  will  produce  a  ohild.  To  persons  devoid  of  verilityi 
the  above  Yoga  (planetary  positions)  will  be  as  useless  as 
the  rays  of  the  Moon  to  the  blind. 

Notes. 

The  Commentator  adds  that  there  would  also  be 
conoeption  when  these  four  planets  are  not  in  their  Navnm- 
sas,  if  the  Sun  and  Veni^s  should  ocoupy  the  IJpachaya 
signs  in  the  horoscope  of  the  man  and  at  the  same  timo 
be  in  their  Navamsas,   or  if  Murs  and  tho  Moon  should 


ta.  4.3  '    BBIHAT  iATXKA.  20 

occupy  the  Upachaya  sigos  in  the  horoscope  of  the  T?oman 
and  at  the  same  time  be  in  their  Navamsud.  : ' 


4.  If  at  the  time  of  conception>  either  Mars  or  Saturn 
should  occupy  the  seventh  house  from  the  Sun  or  Moon  the 
man  and  his  wife  would  tespectinely  fall  ill  (a)  ;  bub  if  one 
of  the  two  planets,  Murs  and  Jupiter,  should  occupy  the 
twelfth  and  the  other  the  second  house  from  the  Sun  and 
Moon,  or  if  one  of  the  planets  should  be  in  coujunction 
with  the  Sua  or  Moon  and  the  other  should  .aspect  either 
ihe  Sun  or  the  Moon,  the  man  and  his  wife  will  respectively 
meet  with  death  (6). 

*  Noteis. 

(a)  In. the  Month  of  Mars  or  Saturn  as  the  case  may 
be  (vide  Stanza  16). 

{b).  In  the  month  of  either  Saturn  or  Mars  whoever  ia 
powerful.'  •     :    '  ' 

The  Comment  iter  adds  that  the  two  eflfects  described 
in  the  Stanza  will  occur  before  and  not  after  the  birth  of 
ihe  child^ 

5.  In  the  case  of  conception  (a)  by  day,  the  Sun  and 
Yenus  represent  respectively  the  father  and  the  mother; 
and  by  night,  Saturn  nnd  the  Moon  represent  respectively 
the  father  and  the  mother.  In  the  ^former  case  Saturn  and 
the  Moon  represent  respectively  the  paterual  uncle  and  the 
maternal  aunt  ;  and  in  the  latter  case  the  Sun  and  Venus 
represent  respectively  the  paternal  uncle  and  the  maternal 
aunt.  If  the  planets  representing  the  father  and  the 
paternal  uucle  should  occupy  the  odd  signs,  ov  if  the  planets 
representing  the  mother  and  the  maternal  aunt  should  occu" 
py  the  even  signs  at  the  time,  then  the  father  and  paternal 
unc  le  or  the  mother  and  the  maternal  aunt  would  be  happy 


30  .     BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [0H«   4^ 

Notos. 
(a)    Or  birth  acoording  to  Uxe  Oommentaton 

6.  If  at  the  time  of  conception  malefic  planets  oiDCnpy 
the  twelfth  house  (a)>  and  if  then  the  rising  sign  be  not 
aapected  by  benefic  planets,  or  if  Saturn  occupy  the  rising 
isign  and  be  aspected  by  the  waning  Moon  and  Mara 
(in  either  case)  the  pregnant  woman  will  die  (&)* 

Kotos. 

(a)  The  second  house  according  to  certain  Comment 
fcitors. 

(i)    Before  delivery  time  according  to  Commentator. 

7.  If  (at  the  time)  either  the  rising  sign  or  the  Moon 
or  both  be  between  malefic  planets  (a)  and  at  the  same  time 
not  aspect  ed  by  the  benefic  planets,  the  preguant  woman 
will   die(fc). 

Notes.  '. 

(a)  As  the  malefic  planets  in  the  present  case  can 
,only  be  three,  viz.j  the  Sun>   Mars,  and   Saturn,  both  the 

rising  sign  and  the  Moon  can  be  between  them  at  the  same 
time  either  when  they  are  together  or  occupy  two  alternate 
houses.  The  Commentator  adds  that  malefic  planets  might 
occupy  either  the  12th  and  the  2nd  houses  from  ,the  ascen- 
dant or  the  Moon  or  both,  or  they  might  occupy  the  Navam- 
sas  on  either  side* 

{b)  Before  delivery  and  in  the  month  of  the  powerful 
malefic  planet. 

8.  If  (at  the  time)  malefic  planets  occupy  the  fourth 
house  and  Mars  the  eighth  house  from  the  ascendant  or  th 


OH.  4]  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  81 

Moon^  or  again  if  Mars  occupy  the  fonriih  Iionso  and  the 
Sun  ilio  ttvolflh  liouse  from  the  osoendaDt^  ibe  pregnanfe 
woman  will  die. 


9.  If  (afc  the  time)  Mars  occupy  tlio  Lajsfna  and  the 
Sun  occupy  the  seventh  house,  the  pregnant  woman  will 
stiffer  death  from  weapons*  If  the  lord  of  any  month  (a) 
bo  uflliotedj  the  pregnancy  will   miscarry  in  that  month. 

Notes' 

(a)  For  the  lords  of  the  several  months  of  pregnancy 
vide  Stanza  16- 

10.  If  the  benefic  planets(a)be  with  the  Moon  or  in 
the  ascendant  (b),  or  if  they  occupy  the  second^  fourth^  fifthf 
seventh^  ninth  and  the  tenth  houses  from  the  Moon  or  tho 
ascendant;  there  will  be  safe  delivery,  provided  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  third  or  eleventh  house  from  the  Moon 
or  the  ascendant,  and  the  Moon  or  the  ascendant,  is  at  tho 
same  time  aspected  by  tho   Sun.  (<;) 

Notes. 
(a)    Those  are  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus. 

{b)     Or   both  at  tlie  same  time. 

(c)  According  to  some  other  reading,  by  Jupiter. 
But  this  is   opp6sed  to  Saravali*    . 

II.  If  (i)  the  rising  sign^  tho  Sun,  Jupitor  and  the 
Moon  be  powerful  and  occupy  tho  odd  (male)  signs  and 
the  odd  Nnvamsas,  the^  issue  will  be  a  malo  child  (6)  ;  if 
they  occupy  the  even  (female)  signs  and  the  even  Navamsas, 
the  issue  will  be  a  female  child  (c) ;  if  again,  the  Sun  and 
Jn  pi  tor  (<I)  occupy  the  odd  signs,  the  issue  will  bo.  a  male 
child  ;  and  if  the  Moon,  Venus  and  Mars(e)  occupy  tlie  even 
signs,  the  issue  will  be  a  female  child.  Also,  if  the  Sun  and 


32  BBIHAT  JATAEA.  [OH.  4. 

Jupiter  occupy  the  two  male  double  bodied  NavamsasT) 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury/  the  issue  will  be  male  twins  ; 
aud  if  Yeuus  and  Mara  occupy  the  two  female  double 
bodied  NavamsasC^)  And  be  aspected  by  Mercuryi  the  issue 
will  be  female  twinsCA). 

Notes. 

(a)  At  the  time  of  conception  or  of  birth  or  of  query 
about  the  one  or  the  other  according  to  Commentator. 

(Jb  &  c)  If  some  of  the  planets  be  in  the  male  and  some 
in  the  female  signs  or  Navamsas^  then  the  sex  of  the  issue 
will  be  that  which  predominates* 

(d  8f  e)  The  planets  should  be  powerful  also. 

(/)    These  are  the  Navamsaa  of  Gemini  and  Sagittari. 

(g)    These  are  the  Navamsas  of  Yirgo  and  Pisces. 

(h)  The  issue  will  be  male  twins  as  well  as  female 
twinS}  if  all  the  four  double  bodied  Navamsas  be  so  occupied. 

12.  If  (at  the  time)(a)  Saturn  occupy  any  of  the  odd 
signs  from  the  rising  sign(&),  the  issue  will  be  a  male  child. 

The  sex  of  the  issue  in  all  the  above  cases  shall  be 

determined  by  the  position  of  the  most  powerful  planet. 

Notes. 

(a)    Of  conception  or  query  according  to  Commentator* 

(J))  This  Yoga  applies  only  in  the  absence  of  the 
Yoga  mentioned  already* 

JV*«  B. — Yoga  is  a  particular  position  of  one  or  more 
planets  either  relatively  to  one  another  or  absolutely  in  the 
ecliptic  or  both. 

13.  (If  at  the  time  of  conception)^  the  Moon  and  the 
Suuj  occupying  respectively  any  of  the  even  and  odd  signs^ 
pspect  each  otberi  or  (2),  if  Saturn  and  Mercury  (occupying 


Clf.  4.]  DainAT  JATAKA.  33 

respectively  any  oE  the  even  and  odd  signs)  aspect  each 
othor,  or  (3)  if  Mars  (in  an  odd  sign)  aspect  (or  be  aspected 
by)  the  Sun  in  an  even  sign^  or  (4)  if  the  Moon  and  Lagna 
in  odd  signs  be  aspected  by  Mars  (in  an  even  sign),  or  (5) 
if  Mars  aspect  the  Moon  and  Mercury  occnpyiog  respec- 
tively even  and  odd  signs^  or  (6)  if  Yenns,  Lngna  and  the 
Moon  occupy  (male  signs  and)  male  Navamsas^  the  issue 
will  be  a  hermaphrodite* 

Notes. 

These  Napumsaka  Yogas  take  effect  only  in  tha  absence 
of  male  and  female  Yogas. 

14.  If,  when  the  Moon  and  Venus  are  in  even  signs, 
Mercury,  Mars^  Jupiter  and  Lagna  be  in  odd  signs,  or  if  a 
male  planet  aspect  Lngna  and  the  Moon  in  the  even  signs^ 
or  if  Morcuiy^  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Lagna  be  powerfnl  and 
occupy  even  signs,  the  issue  will  be  a  male  and  a  female 
child.  Again,  if  Lagna  and  all  the  planets  occupy  the 
Ubhaya  (common)  Navamsas  and  be  aspected  by  Mercury 
in  his  Navamsa,  the  issue  will  be  three  children  :  of  these, 
two  will  be  male  children  if  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  Mer- 
cury be  that  of 'Gemini,  and  two  will  be  female  children  if 
such  Navamsa  be  that  of  Virgo.  Again,  if,  when  Mercury 
occupies  the  Navamsa  of  Gemini,  the  other  planets  and 
Lagna  occupy  the  Navamsas  of  Gemini  and  Sagittari,  all 
the  threo  will  bo  male  children ;  and  if,  when  Morcury  occn- 
pies  the  Navamsa  of  Virgo,  the  other  planets  and  Lngna 
occupy  the  Navamsas  of  Virgo  and  Pisces,  all  the  three 
will  be  female  children. 

1 5.  If  the  last  Navamsa  of  sign  Sagittari  begin  to  rise, 
if  all  the  planets  occupy  the  Navamsa  of  Sagittari  and  be 
powerful,  and  if  the  rising  sign  be  aspected  by  powerful 
Mercury  and  Saturn,  the  issue  will  be  more  than  throe 
children(a) 


5i'  BUInAT  JATAKA.  [oo.  i. 

(a)     That  is  5or  7  or  10  according  to  Commentator, 

10.  Initio  first  month  of  pregnancy  the  embryo  is 
formed;  in  the  second,  it  becomes  Hesh  ;  in  tlie  third,  the 
limbs  aro  formed ;  in  the  fourth,  tho  bones  are  formed  > 
in  the  fifth,  the  skin  is  formed  ;  in  the  sixth,  tho  hair  begins 
to  grow  i  in  the  seventh,  intelligence  ia  infused  into  tho 
child(a3* 

The  lords  of  tho  several  months  from  tho  first  to  tho 
seventh  are  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  tho  Sun,  tho  Moon, 
Saturn  and  Mercury  respectively. 

Notes. 

(a)  In  tho  eighth  month,  the  child  begins  to  eat 
through  tho  navel  cord.  In  the  ninth  mouthy  the  child  is 
filled  with  cares,  and  in  the  tonth  mouth  the  child  is  born^ 
The  lord  of  the  8th  month  is  tho  lord  of  tho  rising  sign  at 
the  time  of  concoptiou.  The  lord  of  tho  9th  mouth  is  tho 
Moon,  and  tho  lord  of  tho  10th  month  is  tho  Sun.  Accord- 
ing to  Yavaneswara^  tho  lord  of  the  first  inonth  is  Mars 
and  that  of  the  second  mouth  is  Youus, 

There  will  bo  miscarriage  of  pregnancy  in  that  month 
whose  lord  happens  to  be  afflicted  at  tho  time  of  conception; 
but  if  any  of  tho  planets  be  of  dim  appearance,  tho  fotus 
will  simply  suffer  iu  tho  month  of  tho  particular  planets. 
If  tho  Sun  bo  powerful  tho  child  would  resemble  its  father, 
and  if  the  Moon  bo  powerful,  tho  child  would  rosemblo  its 
mother.  The  health  and  disposition  of  tho  child  follow 
those  of  its  parents  at  tho  time  of  couoeptiou. 

17.  If  Morcury  occupy  tho  fifth  or  ninth  house  (a)  from 
tho  rising  sign,  aud  if  at  the  same  time  the  other  planets  be 


ttC%   *!•]  BHIflAT  JATaKA.  8^> 

poworlosH,  the  fnco,  tho  legs,  nncl  tbe  liaiids  of  the  child  will 

bo  doubled.     If  tbe  Moon  occupy  sign  Taiiiua  and  if  inalefio 

planots  occupy  the  Biksha  Sandhies(6;>  the  issue  will  be  a 

mute   child  ;   bub   if  the   Moon    be  aspected    by  a  beuefic 
planet,  there  will  bo  speech  after  a  loug  tiuie(c). 

Notes. 

(a)  According  to  some  Commpntntors  the  word  Tri- 
kona  in  tho  text  in  interpreted  as  Moola  trikona,  that  is 
sign  Virgo  hore.  But  this  is  opposed  to  the  opiuiun  of 
Gargo. 

(b)  That  is,  the  last  Navameas  of  the  signs  Cancer, 
Scorpio  and  Pisces* 

(c)  But  if  malefic  planets  nspoct  the  Moon,  tho  child 
will  never  speak ;  if  both  malefic  and  benoGo  planets 
aspect  the  Moon,  the  effects  will  follow  the  powerful  planets « 

18.  If  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  either  the  signs  or 
the  Navamsas(a)  of  Mercury,  the  issue  will  bo  a  child  born 
with  teeth*  If  Cancer  be  tho  rising  sign  and  iE  tho  Moon 
occupy  it  and  bo  aspected  by  Saturn  snd  Mars,  the  child 
will  bo  humpbacked  ;  if  Pisces  be  tho  rising  sign  and  if 
it  bo  aspected  by  Saturn,  tho  Moon  and  Mars,  the  child 
will  bo  lame.  If  a  malefio  planet  ^2^)  and  the  Moon  be  in 
any  of  the  last  Navamsas  of  Cancer,  Scorpio  and  Fiscos, 
tho  child  will  bo  born  deaf.  In  all  tho  above  Yogas  tho 
efiVcts  described  will  oocur  only  if  the  several  planets  are 
not  aspected  by  Jupiter(c). 

Notes. 

(a)     Or   both  tho   signs  and   Navamsas  according   to 
some  Commentators. 

{b)    Ono  of  the  throe   planots,  the  Sun>  Mars  and  Sa- 
turn. 


r 

(c)    So  that  if  the  pbinets  be  aspected  by  Jupiter,  the 
cfTecls  will  not  occur. 


]  9.  If  the  last  Navamsa  of  Hf akara  begin  to  rise  and 
if  it  be  nspected  by  Saturn,  the  Moon  and  the  Sun,  the 
issue  will  be  a  dwarf.  If  Mars  occupy  the  rising  Drek- 
kana  of  the  fifth  house  or  of  the  ninth  houseC'i),  the  issue 
will  be  either  without  a  head  or  without  arms  or  without 
legs  respectivel}^^  if  Mari  bo  aspccted  by  the  Sun^  the  Moon 
and  Saturn. 

Notes. 

(a)  Some  Oommentators  interpret  this  part  of  the 
text  as  follows  ;  if  Mars  occupy  the  1st  or  the  2nd  or  the 
8rd  Drpkkana  of  a  rising  sign,  &c>  But  this  is  opposed  to  the 
opinion  of  Garga. 

20.  If  Leo  be  the  rising  sign  and  if  it  be  occupied  by 
the  Sun  and  Moon  and  aspected  by  Mars  and  Saturn^  the 
issue  will  be  a  blind  child ;  (a)  if  in  the  above  case  benefio 
planets  aspect  the  rising  sign^  the  child  will  be  born  with  a 
mote  in  its  eyes.  If  the  Moon  or  the  Sun  occupy  the  twelfth 
Iiouse  from  the  rising sign(&)^  the  child  will  be  born  blind, 
respectively,  of  the  left   or  the  right  eye(c). 

The  several  Togas  mentioned  above(dj  will  not  wholly 
come  to  pass  it*  the  planets  of  each  Yoga  bo  aspected  by 
benefio  planets* 

Notes. 

(a)  According  to  Commentator  if  the  Sun  alone  occu- 
py sign  Leo;  and  if  it  be  aspected  by  Mars  and  Saturn,  the 
child  will  be  blind  of  the  right  eye  ;  and  if  the  Moon  alone 
should  occupy  sign  Loo^  and  if  it  bo  aspected  by  Mars  and 
Saturn,  the  child  will  be  blind  of  the  left  eye. 

(6)    At  the  time  of  Niisheka  (conception)   or  of  birth. 


en.  5.]  BMHAT  JATAKA.  87 

(c)  Provided  the  Sun  or  tKe  Mood  is  aspectod  by 
Mars  and  Saturn  according  to  bubodliini   Commentator, 

id}    That  is  beginning  from  Stanza  17. 

21.  Find  out  the  number  of  the  particular  Dwnda* 
snmsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time^a)  in  any  Zodi- 
acal sign.  Note  the  Zodiacal  sign  whose  name  the  Dwa- 
dasamsa  bears*  Count  from  the  next  sign  a3  many  signs  as 
the  number  of  Dwadasamsas  by  which  the  Moon  may 
have  advanced  in  any  particular  sign.     When   the  Moon 

comes  to  such  last  sign  the  birth  of  the  child  will  occur. 

♦■ 

Again^  the  birth  will  occur  by  day  or  by  night  accord- 
ing as  the  rising  Navamsa  at  the  time  is  a  day  or  a  night 
Navamsa.  The  hoar  of  birth  from  sun-rise  or  sun-set  may 
be  calculated  from  the  portion  of  the  risiug  Navuuisa  that 
may  have  risen  above  the  horizon. 

Notes. 

(a)  At  the  time  of  conception^  or  query  according  to 
Commentator. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  purposes  to  discover  the  time 
of  child-birth  from  the  time  of  conception  or  query.  Suppose 
the  Moon  to  occupy >  say,  the  8th  Dwadusamsa  of  sign  Aqua- 
rius at  the  time.  This  Dwadasamsa  is  known  as  the  Uwa- 
dasamsa  of  Yirgo  (Kannya).  The  sign  next  to  sign  Yirgo  in 
the  Zodiac  is  sign  Libra  (Tula).  As  the  Moon  occupies  the  8th 
Dwadasamsa  in  sign  Aquarius,  the  8th  sign  from  Libra  is 
sign  Taurus.  The  child  will  therefore  be  born  when  the 
Moon  passes  through  sign  Taurus. 

The  Commentator  adds  that  the  particular  star  which 
the  Moon  would  occupy  at  the  time  of  birth  might  be  dis- 
covered from  the  advance  made  by  her  in  the  particular 
Dwadasamsa  occupied  by  her.  For  instance,  suppose  the 
Moon  to  occupy  the  middlo  of  the  8bh  Dwadusamsa  in  Aqua* 


38  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  4. 

rius.  Tho  middle  of  sign  Taunis  is  the  2nd  quarter  of  Star 
llohini ;  so  that  at  tho  time  o£  birth  of  the  child  the  Moon 
will  occupy  thp  aatorism  of  Bohini. 

Agniu  if  the  rising  Nnvamsa  for  instance  be  that  of 
Sagittari>  anight  sign^  the  birth  will  occur  at  night  The 
time  of  birth  from  f^un-set  should  be  calculated  by  proper* 
tion  from  tho  time  by  which  the  Nayamsa  of  Sagittari  may 
have  risen  above  the  horizon — the  period  of  oblique  ascen- 
sion  of  tho  Navamsa  ropresenting  tho  period  of  tho  whole 
night. 

V  The  sex  of  the  issue  can  bo  detormined  from  stanzas 
11  to  15. 

22.  If  at  the  time  of  concoptioni  the  Navamsa  of 
Saturn(a)  begin  to  rise  and  if  Saturn  occupy  the  seventh 
liouse  from  the  rising  sign,  there  will  be  delivery  after  three 
years;  and  in  similar  case  of  the  Moon(&)  there  will  bo 
delivery  after  twelve  years. 

Which  of  the  several  Yogas  described  in  this  Chapter 
are  applicable  to  tho  time  of  birth  alsOy  shall  be  doterminod 
on  the  nature  of  such  Yogas  (c). 

Notes. 

(a)    That  is  the  Navamsa  of  Makar  or  Kumbha. 

(6)  IE  the  Navamsa  of  Cancer  should  begin  to  rise 
and  if  the  Moon  should  occupy  the  seventh  house  from  tho 
rising  sign. 


(c)  For  instance,  Yogas  relating  to  tho  birth  of  chil- 
dren with  extra  or  defective  organs,  are  to  be  taken  to  refer 
ns  much  to  the  time  of  birth  as  to  the  time  of  conception. 
As  regards  such  Yogas  as  those  relating  to  the  misoarnage 
of  pregnancy  and  the  like,  they  are  to  be  taken  to  refer  to 
thg  time  of  conception  alone* 


ten.  5.2  'bhihat  JiTiKi;  89 

CHAPTER  V. 

On  Mattirs  connsctsd  with  Birth  tihi. 

1.  IF,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  child  the  rising  sign  be 
not  aspected  by  the  Moon,  the  father  will  not  be  near  when 
the  child  is  born— and  if  in  such  a  case,  the  Sao  shonld 
occupy  the  9th  or  the  8th  hoasoi  the  father  would  be  in  a 
foreign  oonntry  if  the  house  be  a  movable  sign,  in  his  own 
country  if  the  house  be  a  fixed  sign,  and  would  be  return- 
ing to  his  country  if  the  house  be  a  common  sign. 

2.  If,  ot  the  time  of  birth »  Saturn  be  in  the  rising 
sign  or  Mars  in  the  setting  sign,  or  the  Moon  between(a) 
Mercury  and  Yenns,  the  father  will  not  be  near. 

<  Notes. 

(a).  Whether  Mercury  and  Venus  occupy  the  signs 
on  both  sides  of  the  Moon  or  occupy  the  same  sign  as  the 
Moon. 

3.  If>  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  be  in  the  Drek- 
kana  of  Mars(a)  and  if  benefic  planets  be  in  the  2iid  and  llth 
houses  from  the  rising  sign,  the  issue  will  be  a  serpent.  If 
the  8ign(&)  of  a  malefic  planet  be  the  ascendant  sign,  and  if 
the  Drekkana  of  Mars  should  then  be  rising,  the  issue  wil 
be  a  child;bom  with  a  serpent  coiled  round  its  body. 

Notes. 

(a).  These  Drekkanas  of  Mars  are — the  1st  Drekkana 
of  Ariids,  the  2nd  of  Cancer^  the  3rd  of  Leo,  the  Ist  of 
Scorpio^  the  2nd  of  Sagittari^  and  the  3rd  of  Pisces. 

(6).  Aries,  Cancer  when  it  is  waning  Moon^  Leo  and 
Scorpio. 

4.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Sun  be  in  a  quadruped 
sign  and  the  other  planets  be  all  powerful  and  in  the  com 
mon  signs^  the  issue  will  be  twins.  6        . 


♦0  pBIHAT  J4T4KA.  tfl^  Sf 

5.  If;  at  th(9  tiiiiQ  of  bii-tb,  4^ries,  Leo  or  T^Qrifs  f^^ 
the  rising  sign^  and  it  Saturn  or  ^ars  bo  if^  sfipl^  9Jgn^  thQ 
^ssuo  will  be  a  child  born  with  fiho  umbilipal  porcl  twioe^ 
round  tIfQ  p^^t  0^  bo()y  ^ndioat^d  l^y  t^e  f isii^g  Nay^m8a(fi)« 

Notes. 

(a).  If  the  N^ramsft  of  AriQS  be  \,]\fi  rising  N^ya^s^ 
^t  the  timej  th^n  round  the  head  ^  if  it  be  thi^t  of  Tai^riiSf 
then  round  the  (ace  and  so  pr\,  following  t^(^  dp|siona  of 
the  bojdy  referred  |;o  |n  Stanza  4^  C|iapt|9r  I. 

6.  If  Jupiter  at  the  tirpQ  of  birth  f^il  tq  ^ppcfi  botl^ 
^he  aspendant  sign  and  the  Mood  (a)  or  the  lyioon  when  ii^ 
popjupptioi)  with  thQ  SuD^  or  \f  thQ  Moqn  be  in  coDJt^nctioii 
with  the  Siin  when  he  is  accompanied  by  ^  malefiQ  planet^ 
^he  issue  will  be  an  illegitimate  child* 

Notes. 

(a).  If  Jupiter  aspect  either  the  onp  or  t^e  other  th(^ 
phild  will  not  be  legitimate. 

Accordiug  to  Yavaneawara,  if  either  the  ascendant 
Navamsa  or  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  that  of 
Jupiter,  the  child  i^ill  not  bo  illegitimate. 

Acoopding  to  G(}rga>  if  the  Moon  should  pcqupy  a  sigqi 
of  Jupiter^  or  if  she  be  in  oonj}|^ptjon  with  Jupiter  in  auy 
pj^her  sigii)  or  if  the  Moon  bQ  in  the  Drekkana  or  Navamsq^ 
of  Jupiter,  the  child  will  not  ]>Q  illegitimate, 

7.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth^  two  malefic  plane^s(a)  occupy 
one  of  the  mali^Qc  sign(&)j  and  if  such  sign  be  the  Bth^  7tlf 
or  9th  ho]:^se  frpin  the  Qau,  the  fa|;he|!:  of  the  child  will  be  ia 
custody  at  the  t^me.  If  the  Sun  oqcupy  a  movable  sign,  thQ 
father  will  be  so  in  foreign  |ands;  if  he  occupy  a  fixe^  sigi^ 
the  father  will  be  ^u  cifstody  in  hjs  own  country^  and  if  h^ 
poQupy  a  common  sign^  the  father  will  be  so  on  ]m  w^y  tq 
})i^  natiye  country. 


tR.  5.]  iRiHiT  JATiKA.  41 

Kbles; 
(a).    Mars  ctnd  Saturn. 

(b)  jft  ries,  Led>  Scorpio,  Caprioom,  Acjiiafios,  Cancer 
'wHeii  ifc  U  wailing  HdoUi  and  Gemini  and  Virgo  when 
liUfcury  is  in  conjancbion  witii  liialefic  planets. 

d.  If  the  Moon  be  full  and  in  Cancer^  if  Mercury  be 
in  th6  rising  sign  and  Jupiter  in  the  4th  Uouse,  the  .birfih 
v^ill  occur  in  A  boitt.  Again;  if  the  watery  signs  begin  to 
rise  add  if  the  Moon  be  in  the  7th  housef;  then  too  the  birth 
will  oc6ur  in  a  boitt. 

SI.  If  a  watery  sign  begin  io  rise,  the  birth  will  certain- 
ly otictir  on  the  banks  of  waiersj  if  (i)  the  Moon  be  also  in 

a  watery  fiign^  or  (2)  if  the  Mood  be  full  and  aspect  the  ris- 
ing  sign;  or  (3)  if  the  Mood  be  in  tUe  10th  or  4th  housd  or 

in  Lagna.r.»AC* 

,      '     »       •  •  •  • 

10.  If  the  Moon  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  if  Saturn 

occupy  the  i2th  hodse  and  be  dspected  by  a  malefic  planet, 
the  birth  will  occur  in  a  prison.  Again^  if  either  Scorpio  or 
Cancer  begio  to  rise  and  be  occupied  by  Saturn  andaspected 
by  the  Moon^  the  birth  Will  occur  in  a  ditch. 

11.  If  a  watery  sign  begin  to  rise  and  if  Saturn  occupy 
it  and  be  aspected  by  Mercury^  the  San^  or  the  Moon,  the 
birth  will  occur  respectively  in  a  pleasure  house,  a  temple 
or  sterile  ground. 

12.  If  a  biped  sign  be  rising,  and  if  Saturn  occupy  it 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  birth  will  be  in  cremation 
ground  ;  if  aspected  by  Venus  and  the  Moon,  the  bhth  will 
occur  in  some  beautiful  and  agreeable  spot ;  it  aspected  by 
Jupiter,  then  in*  the  Agnihotra  Sala(a)  ;  if  aspected  by  the 
Sun,  then  in  the  King^s  palace  or  a  temple  or  a  cow  shed 
and  if  aspected  by  Mercury  the  birth  will  occur  in  an  artistes 
working  room. 


42^  pXHAT  JAtASik..  [i'H;  5«^ 

Notes. 

(a).  A  place  where  the  sacred  fire  is  kept  and 
worshipped. 

13.  The  birth  will  occur  in  plaoes(a)  represented  by  the 
rising  sign  or  Nayamsa,  whichever  is  powerfal.  If  such  sign 
or  Navamsa  be  a  movable  one,  the  birth  will  occur  in  roads  ; 
f  fixed,  then,  within  a  building(  h).  If  the  rising  Navamsa 
be  a  Yargottama  oncj  the  house  will  be  the  mother's  own 

property.  Se^  H  ^\h,     ;t  1,  ...A  ^l^  \-^^^    ^vA 

Notes. 

(a) .  These  places  are  those  referred  to  in  Stanza  S^ 
Chapter  I.  We  will  give  here  the  several  places  appro- 
priate to  the  several  signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

^  Mesha  represents  the  abodes  J^^^^ves)   of  tho  sheep, 

mountains,  the   residence  ^o£  an  army,  a  fire  place,  metal 
mines  and  mines  where  precious  stones  aro  found. 

SJ  Yirshbha  represents  forests,  bottom  of  hills,  places 

frequented  by  the  elephants  and  cattle^and  dwelling  places 
of  the  farmer. 

-tT  Mithuna  represents  places  frequented  by  women  learned 

'"^    in  music  and  painting  for  purpose  of  either  play  or  to  carry 
love  messages  to  lovers. 

Xataka  represents  rice  fields,  tanks,  sand  banks  and 
aces  frequented  by  the  nymphs. 

t\  Simha  represents  forests,  inaccessible  places,    caves, 

mountains  covered  with  forests  and  places  frequented  by 
forestmen. 


•0  pi 


^ 


Elanya     represents    places    overgrown     with     grass 
women's  sleeping  apartments,  and  female  schools. 


^ 


Tula  represents  customs  houses,  middle  streetsibazarsj 


en.   6»]  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  43 

roads    leading  to   towns^  market  placeSi  high  gteutid  and 
places  where  crops  grow. 

Yrischtka  represents  caves,  fortified  towxis,  ditched, 
places  where  there  are  poisonotis  stones,  and  hills  and  snake 
holes  and  soorpion  holes. 

Dhanos  represents  good  and  even  plnces  Where  there 
are  horses  or  cavalry  men  or  armed  men,  pincos  of  sacri- 
ficial fire  ceremonies  or  whore  vehicles  are  kept. 

Makara  represents  rivers,  gardens,  forests,  tanks,  water 
banks  and  ditches. 

yyvVt-         Kumbha  represents  places  frequented  by  birds,  by 
women,  by  dealers  in  liquor  or  by  gambled. 

\£  Meena  represents  temples,   places  frequented  by  the 

Brahmins,  holy  waters^  rivers  and  seas* 

A  v«^*.  '^    (6)-    If  both  fixed  and  movable,  the  birth  would  occur 
jf  *  <  in  the  outer  verandah  of  the  house. 

14.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  Mars  and  Saturn  occupy 
single  sign,  and  if  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  (a)  occupy  the  5th 
or  the  9th  house  from  them^  the  child  will  be  deserted  by 
its  mother;  but  if  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  be  aspected  by 
Jupiter,  the  child  though  abandoned  by  its  mother  will 
live  long  and  in  comfort. 

Notes. 

(a)*  If  the  Moon  occupy  the  setting  sign  according  to 
some  other  reading. 

15.  If  a  malefic  planet  (a)  aspect  the  Moon  in  the 
rising  sign,  Mars  occupyiog  the  7th  housp,  or  if  Mars  and 
Saturn  occupy  the  11th  house  from  the  Moon  when  in  the 
rising  sign^  the  child  deserted  by  its  mother  will  die.  If 
the  Moon  be  also  aspected  by  a  powerful  benefic  planet(&), 
the  deserted  child  will  fall  into  the  Lands  of  the 
class  of  men  represented  by  the  aspecting  benefic  planet 


a  BBIHAT  iATAKA.  [CH*   9. 

arid  will  live;  If  tte  aspddting  malefic  planet  be  powerful; 
the  deserted  cliild  Will  fall  into  itie  bauds'  of  otbei^s' d'l^d 
will    perish  ; 

Notes." 
(a).     Saturn  or  Mars. 

(5).  if  Jupiter  asp6c'i  the  Moon^  none  of  these  evils 
will  befall  the  child. 

16.  If  a  paternal  plaiuet  be  pow^r^ul)  t'he  hiviil  will  occnr 
ih  the  fathered  house  5  if  a  maternal  planet  be  powerful;  th6 
birth  will  occur  iu  the  mother's  house  /  if  three  benenc' 
planets  be  powerful;  the  birth  will  occur  at  the  foot  of  walls 
or  trees  ;  and  if  three  planeid  occupying  &  single  sign  fail  to' 
Aspect  the  Lagna  and  the  Moon,  the  birth  will  occur  in  at 
fofesi 

17.  If  the  Moon  occupy  the  Navalmda  of  Saturn  or 
tTi6  4th  hous6  (U)  from  Lagna,  or  if  she  be  aspected  by 
Saturn^  or  if  she  occupy  a  watery  Navamsa(6)  Or  the  same 
house  as  Saturn,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a  d^rk  spot(c).  If 
three  or  more  planets  be  in  their  Neecha  signs(c2) ,  the  birth 
will  oc3ur  on  the  bare  ground  (0).  The  birth  will  follow 
the  manner  in  which  the  rising  sign  reaches  the  horizon  (/). 
If  malefic  planets  occupy  the  4th  or  7th  house,  the  mother 
will  sutTer  much  fj^om'  travail  (g). 

Notes, 
(a).    Yavanachariar  uses  the  word  Kendra,  meaning 
ilie  Ist,  4th,  7th  and  10th  houses. 

(2)).    Water  Navamsas  are  those  of  Cancer  and  Pisces, 

(c).  If  the  sun  be  powerful  and  be  aspected  by  Mars, 
there  will  be  no   darkness. 

(d).  Saravali  has  the  word,  *^  Neecha  Samsthe,  ^  that  is, 
if  the  Moon  be  in  her  Neecha  sign,  viz,  Scorpio. 

(e).  Ou  ground,  covered  with  straw  according  to 
Commentator. 


(f).  Tbl^b  is,  if  the  sign  be  one  that  rises  with  it9 
^ead^  then  the  bead  of  the  ch^ld  will  appear  fust  /  if  the 
jsign  be  .0)qLO  that  ffSfi^  with  its  ^tail^  tl^e  leg  of  the  child 
^will  appear  first :  and  if  it  be  one  that  rises  with  both  its 
^ea4  ad4  lfi§  as  sign  PisceS|  the  hf  nds  will  appear  first* 

According  to  certain  Commeplatprs  tlr*s  partpf  th^ 
jtext  is  interpret^e4  as  ^(^l/^ws '  If  the  lord  of  the  ri$ipg 
fiign  be  in  his   direct   course,   the  birth   will  be  a  natural 

4 

pne  ;  aLd  if  in  ^is  roirogade  motion,  the  birth  will  be  an  ir« 
^regular  one.    This   meaning  has  the  support  of  Manittha, 

(g).  Or  if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  same  sign  as  thp 
Hoon,  the  mother  will  su^er  from  jbraya^L 

18.  The  oil  shall  be  determined  from  the  Moon(a),tho 
wick  from  the  rising  8ign(/>)  ;  the  fixed  or  other  nature  of 

the  lamp  shall   b.e  determined  from  the  sign   occupied   by 
the  Sun(c).      The   entrance   to   the  room   will  be  in  the 

direction  of  the  powerful  planet   occupying  a  Kendra((2)  or 

in  that  of  the  most  pow.erf  ul  plane|b. 

Notes* 

(a).  That  is^  if  the^Moon  occupy  the  beginning  of  a 
^ign^  the  oil  of  the  l^mp  ii^  the  delivery  room  will  be  full; 
if  the  Moon  occupy  the  middle  sign,  the  oil  will  be  one-half| 
and  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  end  of  a  sign,  there  will  be  no 
,oil  in  the  l^mp;  in  other  words,  the  quantity  of  oil  varies 
with  the  position  of  the  Moon  in  the  si^n  oooup^ed  by  her. 

According  to  ^arayali;  if  the  Mpon  be  full  the  oil  will 
l^e  full  and  the  quantity  of  the  oil  varies  witlTi  the  i||un^}n^(l 
portion  of  the  Moon^sdisc.  Batt^  Utpala,  the  Commehta- 
jtor,  objects  to  this  view,  for  he  says  that  if  such  were  the 
pase,  children  born  on  new-moon  doya  should  always  |)^ 
born  in  the  dark-*-lhis  cannot  be. 


46  BBIHAT  JATAEA."  [OH.  & 

(&).  That  IS,  if  the  beginning  of  a  sigo  begin  to  riso^ 
the  wick  will  be  long  and  unbumt;if  the  middle  of  the 
sign  begin  to  rise,  the  wiokwillbo  half  burnt;  and  if  the 
end  of  the  sign  begin  to  risOi  the  wick  will  be  nearly 
wholly  burnt.  In  other  words^  the  length  of  the  wick  varies 
wifch  the  position  of  the  point  of  the  rising  sign  in  contact 
with  the  horizon. 

The  wick  is  of  the  color  of  the  rising  sign. 

(o),  That  is,  if  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun  be  a  fixed 
one,  the  lamp  will  be  fixed  in  some  place;  if  movable^  the 
lamp  will  be  carried  by  some  body  in  the  hand  ;  and  if  both 
fixed  and  movable  the  lamp  will  be  a  swinging  lamp.  The 
Commentator  adds  that  the  lamp  will  be  in  the  direction 
assigned  to  the  signs  oocupied  by  the  Sun.  According  to 
some  the  lamp  will  be  in  the  dirootion  of  the  sign  (out  of 
12  equal  parts  into  which  the  room  may  be  divided)  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun.  This  latter  division  evidently  refers  to 
the  division  referred  to  in  the  Introduction  in  conneotion 
with  Horary   Astrology: 

According  to  others  again  dividing  the  24  hours  of  day 
and  night  into  8  equal  parts  of  3  hour9  each^  beginning  from 
Bun-rise^  the  lamp  will  be  in  the  East,  S.  East,  South,  Ssc, 
according  as  the  time  of  birth  falls  in  the  Ist,  2nd,  3rd^  &c.^ 
parts  of  the  division. 

(d)  If  there  are  no  planets  in  the  Kendras,  the  on- 
trance  will  be  in  the  direction  of  the  Lagna  according  to 
Swalpa  Jataka. 

19.  If  Saturn  be  powerful^  the  birth  will  occur  in  ^ 
house  whioh,  having  become  old,  has  been  rebuilt.  If  Mars 
be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a  house  partly  burnt; 
if  the  Moon  be  powerful,  then,  in  a  newly  built  house;  if 
the  Sun  be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a  house  buihi 
of  wood  but  weak  j  if  Mercury  be  powerful  then  in  a  housci 


en.  5.3  BRIHAT  jataka.  47 

built  by  several  builders;  if  Venus  bo  powerful, 
then  in  a  beauiiful  new  boose  adorned  with  piotures;  and 
if  Jupiter  be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a  strong 
bouse. 

Notes. 

According  to  Saravali^  if  the  Sun  occupy  the  sign  occu- 
pied by  the  most  powerful  planet  as  given  in  the  text,  tho 
delivery  will  occur  in  the  room  set  apart  for  the  worship 
of  the  Devas  ;  if  the  Moon  ocjcupy  the  sign  occupied  by  th^ 
most  powerful  planet^  the  birth  will  cocur  in  the  bath  or 
water  room  ;  if  Mars>  then  in  the  kitehen  or  tho  Aghihotra 
Sala  ;  if  Mercury^  in  the  bed  room  ;  if  Jupiter>  in  the  trea<- 
snre  room;  if  Venus,  then  in  the  play  ground;  and  if 
Saturn^  the  birth  wjill  occur  in  the  place  where  sweepings 
are  deposited. 

The  Commentator  iKlds  if  there  be  three  or  more  planets 
in  the  three  signs  beginning  from  that  occupied  by  the  most 
powerful  planet,  there  will  be  houses  on  the  eastern  side  ; 
if  in  the  next  three  signs,  there  will  be  houses  on  the  south-^ 
ern  side;  if  in  the  next  three,  there  will  be  houses  on  the 
western  side ;  and  if  in  the  l&sji»  three,  there  will  be  houses 
on  the  northern  side. 

Again,  according  to  Laghu  Jatnka,  if  Jupiter  at  the 
same  time  be  in  the  10th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  in  his 
exaltation  sign — having  passed  over  the  exaltation  degree, 
the  birth  will  occur  in  a  two  storied  house  ;  if  he  be  under 
the  exaltation  degree,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a  three 
storied  house,  and  if  in  the  exaltation  degree,  then  in  a 
four  storied  house. 

Again,  if  Sign  Eagittari  be  powerful,  the  birth  will 
occur  in  a  house  consisting  of  3  inner  verandahs ;  if  Jupi- 
ter occupy  the  1 0th  house  from  the    ascendant  or  one  of  the 

7 


I 

I 

48  BBIHAT    JATAEA.  [CS.    5. 

signs  Gemini^  Virgo  and  Pisces,  the  house  will  be  one  with 
two  inner  verandahs. 

20.  If  either  tlie  aiscendant  sign,  or  the  ascendant 
Navamsa,  (whichever  is  powerful)  be  that  oi  Aries,  Cancer, 
Libra,  Scorpio,  or  Aquarius,  the  delivery  room  will  be  iu 
the  eastern  portion  of  the  house  ;  if  it  be  that  of  Sagittari, 
Pisces,  Gemini  or  YirgOi  then  in  the  northern  portion  of  the 
house  )  if  it  be  that  of  Taurus,  then  in  the  western  portion  ; 
and  if  it  be  that  of  Capricorn  or  Leo,  the  delivery  room 
will  be  iu  the  southern  portion  of  the  house. 

21.  If  the  rising  sign  be  Aries  or  Taurus,  the  bed  of 
the  woman  in  labor  will  be  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the 
room  ;  if  the  rising  sign  be  Gemini,  it  will  be  in  the  south- 
eastern portion ;  if  Cancer  or  Leo,  then  in  the  sontheru 
portion  j  and  if  Virgo,  then  in  the  south-western  portion-f 
if  Libra  or  Scorpio,  then  in  the  westei'n  portion  j  and  if 
Sagittari,  then  in  the  north-western  portion  :  if  Capricorn 
or  Aquarius  be  the  rising  sign,  the  bed  will  be  in  the  northj; 
em  portion  of  the  room,  and  if  Pisces  be  the  rising  sign,  it 
will  be  in  the  north-eastern  portion  of  t))e  room*  The 
same  rule  applies  as  regards  the  place  in  the  bed  or  cot 
where  the  womau  might  lie.  As  regards  the  co^,  figain, 
its  two  front  legs  occupy  ttie  quavt^rs  assigned  to  the 
12th.  and  3rd  houses  fropi  the  ascendant  and  jtei  two  hiu^ 
legs  occupy  the  quaiters  assigned  to  the  Cth  and  9th 
houses.(a). 

No.tes. 
(a)  In  other  words  the  J  2th  and  Hrd  ho^ses  represent 
the  fore  legs ,-  the  9th  and  6th  houses  represent  tbe  hin4 
legs;  the  Srd  and  6th  ho^ses  represent  the  two  right  legs, 
and  the  12th  and  9th  houses  represent  the  two  left  legs. 
Also  the  rising  sign  and  the  2nd  house  represent  the  head 
of  the  cot>  the  4th  and  5  th  houses  reprosen^,  the  ri^ht  siv!^  » 


CH.   5-]  BBraAT  JATAKA.  49 

the  7th  and  8th  honses  represent  the  parb  between  the 
two  hind  Iegs»  and  the  10th  and  1 1th  houses  represent  tho 
left  side.  Now  whatever  portion  of  the  cot  may  be  repre- 
sented by  the  common  signs,  there  the  cot  will  be  bent 
down  a  little>  and  this  will  not  be  the  case  if  such  sign  is 
either  occupied  or  aspected  by  its  lord  or  by  a  benefio 
planet.  Again^  there  will  be  defects  in  those  parts  of  the 
Cot  which  are  represented  by  signs  occupied  by  malefio 
planets,  and  this  will  not  be  the  case  if  such  malefic  planets 
be  in  their  exaltation  signs,  in  their  Moola  Trikona  signs, 
in  friendly  signs  or  in  their  own  houses. 

22.  The  number  of  mid  wives  will  be  tho  number  of 
the  planets  between  the  rising  sign  and  the  Moon.  Of 
these  planets  the  number  of  those  in  the  visible  hemisphere 
will  be  the  number  of  midwives  outside  the  room,  and  the 
number  of  planets  in  the  invisible  hemisphere  will  be  the 
number  of  midwives  inside  the  room.  According  to  some 
this  order  is  reversed  .(a). 

Notes. 

(a)  That  is,  of  the  planets  between  the  Lagna  and  the 
Moon,  the  number  in  the  visible  hemisphere  is  the  number 
of  midwives  within  the  room,  and  the  number  of  planets  in 
the  invisible  hemisphere  will  be  the  number  of  midwives 
outside  the  room*  In  this  view  Varaha  Mihira  does  not 
concur,  for  it  is  opposed  to  his  Swalpa  Jataka. 

Again,  if  beneGo  planets  occupy  the  signs  from 
Lagna  to  the  Moon,  the  midwives  will  all  be  beautiful 
women,  well  dressed  and  adorned  ;  if  malefic  planets  occupy 
the  signs,  the  women  will  be  dirty,  ugly  and  with  no  orna- 
ments. 

Again,  if  any  of  the  planets  between  the  Lagna  and  tho 
Moon  be  in  their  exaltation  signs  or  retrograde  in  motion^ 
the  number  given  by  them  shall  bo  trebled.     But  if  they  be 


50  HBmkT  jkTitk.  [c6.  6s 

in  their  own  signs^  Navamsas  or  Drekkanas^  &c.,  ilie  number 
given  by  the  several  planets  sLall  be  doubled. 

23.  The  structare  aud  other  peculiar! tiP8(a)  of  the 
body  shall  be  determined  from  the  lord  of  the  rising  Navam- 
sa  or  from  the  most  powerful  planet ;  and  the  color(b)  of 
the  body  shuU  be  determined  from  the  (Lord  of^the)  Navam- 
sa  occupied  by  the  Moon  ;  and  the  size  of  the  several  parts 
of  the  body  will  follow  the  signs  representing  them,  begin- 
ing  from  the  rising  sign  which  represents  the  headed). 

Notes. 

(a)  These  are  given  in  stanzas  from  8  to  11  ini 
Chapter  II* 

The  Commentator  adds  that  if  the  sign  represented  by 
the  rising  Navamsa  be  powerful,  then  the  physical  peculiaii- 
ties  shall  be  determined  from  the  lord  of  sach  Mavamsa  ; 
if  not  they  shall  be  determined  from  the  most  powerful 
planet. 

(b)  This  is  given  in  stanza  4,  Chapter  IL  According  to 
some>  the  color  must  be  determined  from  the  sign  occupied 
by  the  Moon,  vide  stanza  20,  Chapter  I.  To  this  the  Com- 
mentator objects.  For  he  says  that  there  are  no  people  of 
the  color  of  the  parrot.  In  determining  the  color,  the  country^ 
the  climate,  occupation  •  and  the  like  shall  be  taken  into 
acccunt. 

(o)  The  division  of  body  referred  to  here  is  the  same 
as  thut  refei'red  to  in  Stanza  4,  Chapter  I,  with  this  differ- 
Ouoo  thut  while  the  latter  begins  from  sign  Aries,  the  for- 
mer begins  from  the  rising  sign.  The  divisions  are  as  fol- 
lows : 

The  rising  sign  represents  the  head  ;  the  2nd  house 
represents  the  face  ;  the  3rd,  the  breast ;  the  4th^  the  heart  ; 
the  5th,  the  belly  ;  the  0th,  the  hip  ;  the  7th,  the  lower 
abdomen  ;  the  8th,  the  genital  organ  ;  the  9th,  the  two 
thighs  I  the  10th>  the  two  knees  -,  the  Uth,  the  two  shanks 


Ott.   5.]  dRIHAT    JkTAKkl  51 

And  the  l^fchjttid  two  feet.  Now  in  stanza  19  of  Chapter 
I,  the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  several  signs  of  the  Zodiac 
are  given  as  follows  i 

.    J  Aries..;..  *ii20 — Pisces. 
*  I  Taurus..;;... 24 — Aquariusi; 

Ti    t  Gemini ;;28 — Capricorn* 

^'  I  dancer 32-^Sagittari. 

p    f  Leo.;; 36 — Scorpio. 

^'1  Virgo ....40— Libra. 

Of  these  the  4  signs  referred  to  in  division  A  are  knowil 
as  short  signs.  The  4  of  division  B  are  known  as  signs  of 
middle  length  and  the  4  of  division  G  are  known  as  long 
signs.  So  that  that  part  of  the  body  will  be  long  or  short 
according  as  the  sign  representing  it  is  long  or  short. 
If  the  lord  of  a  short  sign  occupy  a  long  sign,  or  if  the  lord 
of  a  long  sign  occupy  a  short  sign,  the  size  of  the  part  of 
body  represented  will  be  of  -middle  length*  If  several 
planets  occupy  a  sign,  the  most  powerful  of  them  shall  be 
taken  into  account,  and  if  no  planets  occupy  a  sign,  the  size 
of  the  part  of  body  will  simply  follow  that  of  the  sign. 

24.  The  three-fold  divisions  of  the  tody  beginning 
from  the  head,  from  the  neck  and  from  the  lower  abdomen, 
according  as  the  rising  Drekkana  is  the  first,  the  second  or 
the  third,  are  as  follows : 


The  twelve 
Houses. 


The  rising 
siLm. 


Part  of  body  represented  when  the  rising 

Drekkana  is 


rn 


The  fir^t. 


Head. 


The  second. 


The  third. 


Neck, 


Lower  abdomen. 


52 


BUIHAT  JATAEA. 


[oh,   0« 


2nd  house.'. 
I2fch 


?rd 

]  1  ill 

4t.li 

10th 

5  th 

9th 

6th 

8th 

7th 


n 

>3 


•  •  • 


•  •' 


•  • . 


Rip^ht  eye 
...]Le!c  eye 
iliglit  ear 
Left  oar 
Right  uostril. 
Left  nostril... 
Right  temple. 
Left  temple... 
Riorht  cheek... 

o 

Left  cheek... 


Right  arm 
Lef  c  arm 
Right  hand 
Left  Imnd 
Right  side 
Left  side 
Right  breast 
Left  breast 
Right  belly 
Lett  belly 


•  •• 


•  • 


Mouth         .,.11116  navel 


Genital  organ. 
Anus. 

Right  testicle. 
.  .  Loft  testicle* 
...JRight  thigh- 
Left  thigh. 
Right  knee. 
Left  knee. 
Right  ankle* 
Lef  c  aokle. 
The  feet. 


.  •  • 


•  •• 


25. 


Wounds  will  occur  in  those  parts  of  body  the  signs 
representing  which  are  occupied  by  malefic  planets  ;  but  if 
such  signs  be  occupied  or  aspected  by  benefio  planets,  moles 
will  appear  in  those  parts  ;  if  such  malefic  or  benefic  planets 
be  in  their  own  signs  or  Navamsas  or  in  fixed  signs  or  fixed 
Navamsas^  the  wound  or  the  mole  will  exist  from  birth  ; 
otherwise  they  will  appear  at  a  future  time(a).  As  regards 
woundsj  if  the  planet  causing  it  be  Saturn^  the  wound  will 
be  caused  by  a  stone  or  by  the  wind  ;  if  Mars,  then  by  fire 
or  weapon  or  by  poison ;  if  (malefic)  Mercury,  it  will  be 
caused  by  earth  >  if  the  Sun,  then  by  wood  or  by  quadru- 
peds; if  the  (waning)  Moon,  then  by  horned  animals  or  by 
water  animals.  There  will  be  no  wound  in  those  parts  of  the 
body  which  are  represented  by  signs  occupied  by  the  bene« 
fie  planets(&). 


Notes. 

(a)  That  is,  in  the  dasa  or  planetary  periods  of  the 
several  planets. 

(6)  By  Jupiter,  Venus,  (benefic)  Mercury  and  wax- 
ing Moon. 

For  the  purposes  of  this  stanza  the  division  of  body  is 
that  referred  to  in  stanza  24* 

26*    If  three  planetSi  whether  malefic  or  benefio  occupy 


CH.  6.,]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  53 

a  single  sign,  a  wound  or  a  mole  will  appear  without  fail  in 
the  parts  of  body  represented  by  the  sign. (a)  Agnin  in  the 
divisioncb)  of  the  body  into  twelve  parts  beginning  from  the 
head  (which  the  Lagna  represents)  if  a  malefio  planet  oc- 
cupy the  sixth  house  a  wound  will  Rppear(c)  (in  the  hip) ; 
bat  if  the  malefio  planet  be  aspected  by  a  benefic  planet^ 
both  a  dark  and  a  white  mole  will  appear;  but  if  benefic 
planets  occupy  the  sixth  house^  there  will  only  appear  a 
crowded  growth  of  hair. 

NOTES. 

(a)  Tbo  division  of  body  referred  to  is  that  given  in 
stanza  24. 

(b)  Tl^e  division  referred  ^o  is  that  given  in  Note  (c) 
to  stanza  23. 

(c)  In  the  dasa  period  of  the  most  powerful  planet. 
Also^  if  the  planet  occupying  the  6th  house  be  in  his  own 
0ign  or  Navamsa  or  in  a  fixed  sigi^  or  Nayamsa/  the  wound 
or  tUe   molp  Vf'M  exist  fron^  birth* 


OEfAPTER  VI. 

On  IfALARISHTA  OK  EAKLy  DbATH. 

1.  If  l|he  birth  should  occur  in  the  @andhyakala(a) 
^the  twilight  hours)  ^hen  ^l^e  lunar  Qora  (5)should  be  rising 
9.nd  when  innlefio  planets  occupy  the  last  Nayamsas  of 
signS}  the  child  would  die  soqu  after  birth.  Again>  if  at 
the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  and  three  malefic  planets  occu- 
py ifhe  four  !^endras^  one  i^  ec^ch^  thei^  aUo  the  child  would 
die. 

JJotes. 

(a).  Sandhy^kala  ;  This  is  defined  by  the  author  in 
his  Brihat  Samhita,  stanztv  I9  ch.  80  ;  f*  That  period  which 
precedes  the  moment  when  the  Sun  has  just  half  risen  and 


m  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH,  6r 

that  which  succeeds  the  moment  when  the  Sun  has  just 
half  set)  .during  which  the  stars  are  invisible^  is  known  as 
Sandhyakala  or  twilight  period.'^ 

(2;)  In  the  odd  signs,  the  second  halves,  and  in  the 
;even  signs  the  first  halves  are  known  as  lunar  Horas. 

2.  If  either  ^ign  Cancer  or  sign  Scorpio  should  rise  at 
the  timn  of  birth  and  if  malefic  planers  occupy  the  east-* 
.ern  half  of  the  Zodiac  while  the  bepefic  planets  occupy 
tho  western  hHlf(a),  the  cliild  would  die  imniediutoly  after 
birth.  Again,  if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  12th  and  2nd 
liouses  01*  the  6th  and  8th  houses  from  the  rising  sign^  the 
/child  would  die^ 

Notes, 

r 

(a).  The  plane  of  meridian  divides  the  Zodiac  into 
two  equal  halves  known  as  the  Eastern  and  Western 
halves  j  so  that  if  the  10^  of  Cancer^  for  instance^  should  bQ 
rising  at  tl^e  time,  the  !l^astern  h.2|i*If  would  roughly  comprise 
tlio  portion  of  the  Zodiac  from  the  10^  of  Aries  to  the  10^ 
of  lii^^i-a, ;  ar^d  the  \yester):i  half  would  comprise  the 
portion  of  the  Zodiac  from  the  ip°  of  Libra  to  the  10^  o{ 
Aries. 

(t).  According  to  certain  Commentatora,  the  two 
yogas  are  taken  together*  and  made  to  form  4  single  yoga. 
In  other  words,  the;^child  would  die  under  the  first  yoga 
only  if  malefic  planets*  occupy  tho  2nd,  the  12th,  the  6th 
^nd  the  Sih  houses.  Accordii^g  tp  G^jrga  there  will  be 
death  in  each  of  the  following  four  yogas  :  (l)Malefic  planets 
occupying  Xhf^jbik  aud  the  12th  houses  ;  (2)  the  8th  and  2nd 
hou8es;(i5)  the  12th  and  2nd  hoi:|8es,-  (4)  the  8th  and  iHh 
houses. 

3.  If  the  rising  sign,  the  setting  sigi^  ^nd  the  sign 
spccupied  by  the  Moua  b©  eacl|  occupied  by  a  piujefic  plai^^t 


OB*  6J]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  65 

ondifthe    Moon  be  not  aspected  by  benefio  planets,  the 
child  will  die  immediately  afber  birth. 

4.  If  the  waning  Moon  occupy  the  12th  house  from 
the  ascendant^  if  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  rising  sign 
and  the  8th  house^  and  if  bene6c  planets  do  not  occupy  the 
KendraSj  the  child  will  die  immediately  after  birth. 

6«  If  the  Moon  attended  by  a  malefic  planet  occupy 
the  rising  sign  or  the  7th,  8th  or  12th  house,  and  if  benefio 
planets  do  not  occupy  the  Kendras>  the  child  will  die  soon 
after  birth. 

6.  Ifi  when  the  Moon  occupies  the  6th  or  the  8th 
house  from  tho  ascendatit,  a  malefic  planet  aspect  the  same 
the  child  will  die  soon  after  birth  ;  if  a  benefic  planet  alone 
aspect  it^  the  child  will  die  after  8  years  ;  and  if  both  a  be- 
nefic and  a  malefic  planet  aspect  the  Moon>  the  child  will 
die  4  years  after  birth  (a) ;  but  if  a  benefic  planet  (occupy- 
ing the  6th  or  the  8th  house)  be  aspected  by  powerful  male- 
fic planets(6),  or  if  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  occupy  the  7th 
house  and  be  defeated  in  planetary  fight'  (conjunction)  by 
a  malefic  planet(e),  tho  child  will  die  a  month  after  birth* 

Notes. 

(a).  In  connection  with  this,  Tavaneswara  Rays  :  If 
the  6th  or  the  8th  house  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  the 
house  of  a  benefio  planet,  or  if  tho  Moon  be  accompanied 
by  a  benefio  planet,  even  though  he  mny  be  in  a  malefic  sign 
the  child  will  not  die.  Mandavya  says :  If  the  birth,' 
occur  by  day  in  the  dark  half  or  by  night  in  the  bright 
half  of  the  month,  there  will  be  no  deaths  even  if  the  Moon 
occupy  the  6th  or  the  8th  house  and  be  aspected  by  both 
malefic  and  benefic  planets* 

(6).    In  the  absence  of  benefio  plmets  aspecting  the 
Moon,  adds  the  Commentator.    Swalpa  Jatnka    has    the 


following : 


8 


66  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [oH.  6« 

''  By  malefio  planets  or  by  planets  retrograde  in  theii^ 
motion." 

(e).  Tlie  planet  that  generally  safFers  defeat  in  con- 
junction; is  the  southern  one,  one  of  forbidding  appear-* 
aucCj  one  of  flickering  light,  one  retrograde  in  motion  or  of 
Email  size,  or  in  conjunction  with  the  Suui  or  which  is  of 
unusual  appearance  or  without  light  or  color. 

7.  If  the  waning  Moon  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  if 
malefic  planets  occupy  the  8th house  and  the  Kendras^  or  if 
the  Moon  occupy  the  4th,  7(ih  or  8th  house  and  be  between 
malefic  planets^  the  child  will  die.  Again^  if  the  Moon 
occupy  the  rising  sign  and  be  between  malefic  planets  and 
if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  7th  and  8th  houses  and 
powerful  benefic  planets  fail  to  aspect  the  Moon(a);both  the 
mother  and  the  child  will  die. 

Notes. 

(a)«  If  they  do  aspect  the  MooU)  the  mother  will 
escape  and  the  child  will  die. 

8.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  the  last 
Nayamsa  of  a  sign  and  not  be  aspected  by  benefic  planets^ 
oi*  if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  5th  and  the  9th  houses  or 
if  the  Moon  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  malefic  planets 
occupy  the  7th  house,  tho  child  will  die  soon  after  birth. 

9*  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  eclipsed  Moon  occupy 
tho  rising  sign  with  a  malefio  planet(a)  while  Mars  occapies 
the  8th  house,  both  the  mother  and  the  infant  will  die.  If 
instead  of  the  Moouj  the  Sun(&)  be  in  a  similar  position^ 
such  death  will  be  caused  by  weapons.  Again>  if  either  the 
Sun  or  the  Moon  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  if  malefic  pla- 
nets occupy  the  5thj  8th  and  9th  houses,  the  child  will  die^ 
if  either  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  be  neither  aspected  nor  ac- 
companied by  powerful  benefic  planets. 


«H«   6.]  BBIHAT  JATAKl*  £7 

NoteS' 

(a).     Tbat  is  Saturn. 

(6).  That  is,  i£  the  eclipsed  Sun  occupy  the  rising 
sign  accompanied  bjr  a  malefic  planet  (either  Mercury  or 
Saturn)^  while  Mars  occupies  the  8th  house. 

10.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturuj  the  San,  the 
Moon  and  Mars  occupy  respectively  the  32th,  Otb,  Ist  and 
the  8th  houses,  the  child  will  die  soon  after  birth  if  Iho 
planets  be  not  aspected  by  powerful  Jupiter. 

Notes. 
To  aspect  all  the  four  planets,  Jupiter  must  occupy 
the  5th  house.  If  Jupiter  should  aspect  only  some  of  the 
four  planets,  or  if  he  be  weak  though  he  might  aspect  all 
the  four  planets,  the  child  will  die*  So  that  the  -child 
will  escape  death  only  if  powerful  Jupiter  aspect  all  the 
four  planets. 

11.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  (a)  accompanied 
by  a  malefic  planet  occup;  the  5th,  7th,  9th,  12th,  1st  or 
8th  house,  and  if  she  be  neither  accompainied  nor  as- 
pected by  powerful  Venus,  Mercury  or  Jupiter>  the  child 
will  die  soon  after  birth. 

Notes. 

(a).  The  Moon  is  the  waning  Moon  according  to  Sa* 
ravali. 

12.  The  death  will  occur  when  the  Moon  comes  either 
to  the  sign  occupied  by  the  powerful  planet  causing  sucli 
death,  or  to  the  sign  occupied  by  herself  at  the  time  of 
birth  or  to  the  rising  sign  at  the  time,  provided  the  Moon 
is  both  powerful  and  aspected  by  powerful  malefic  planets  ,• 
and  the  Munis  say  •  that  the  period  for  such  death  is  a 
year,  (a) 


58  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [0H«  6. 

Notes. 

(a).  The  M  oon  makes  about  13  revolutions  in  the 
course  of  a  year.  Whenever  tho  Moon  in  the  coarse  of 
motion  becomes  powerful  and  is  aspected  by  powerful 
malefio  planets  on  reaching  *one  of  the  three  plaoes  men- 
tioned in  the  text^  the  death  will  occur. 

Notes: — Tho  Commentator  now  proceeds  to  describe  a 
number  of  yogas  which  counteract  the  several  Balarishta 
yogas  given  in  the  test.    They  are  given  below. 

1.  If  powerful  Jupiter  occupy  the  rising  sign^ 
there  will  be  no  early  death. 

2.  If  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  be  powerful,  be  not 
aspected  by  malefio  planets  and  be  aspected  by  benefic  pla- 
nets occupying  the  Kendras^  the  child  will  live  long. 

S'  Even  though  the  Moon  should  occupy  the  Sth 
house^  if  she  should,  at  the  same  time,  occupy  the  Drek- 
kana  of  Jupiter,  Mercury  or  Venus,  there  will  be  no  early 
death. 

4.  If  the  Moon  be  full,  if  she  should  occupy  benefic 
signs,  be  between  beneBc  planets  and  bo  aspected  by  Ye^ 
nus,  there  will  be  no  early  death. 

5.  If  either  Mercury,  Venus  or  Jupiter  be  powerful  and 
occupy  a  Keudra,  there  will  be  no  early  death  even  if  he  be 
accompanied  by  a  malefic  plant. 

G.  Though  the  Moon  occupy  tho  6th  house  there  will 
be  no  earl^  death  if  she  occupy  the  Drekkana  of  Jupiter, 
Venus  or   Mercury. 

7.  If  the  Moon  be  full  and  be  between  benefic  planets^ 
here  will  be  no  early  death, 

8.  If  the  Moon  bo  full  or  if  the  birth  occur  during 
the  day  whou  it  is  waning  Moon^  or  during  the  night  when 


<IH.   7.1  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  59 

ifc  is  waxing  Moon>  there  will  be  no  early  death  even  if  the 
Moon  occapy  the  6th  or  the  iBth^ouse. 

9.  If  the  Moon  be  fall  and^be  aspected  by  Jupiter 
occupy iDg  a  Kendra,  there  will  be  no  early  death. 

10.  If  Jupiter,  the  Moon^  Venus  and  Mercury  occupy 
he  houses^  the  Navamsaa  or  the  Drekkanas  of  benefio  pla- 
nets^ there  will  bo  no  early  death. 

11.  If  either  tho  lord  of  tho  houso  occupied  by  the 
Moon  or  if  a  benefic  palnet  occupy  a  Kendra^  there  will  be 
no  early  death* 

12.  If  malefio  planets  occupy  boDofic  Vargas  (divi< 
sion^)  and  be  aspected  by  benefic  planets^  oocnpyuig  benefio 
Vargas,  there  will  be  no  early  death* 

13.  If  Babu  occupy  the  3rdj  6th  or  11th  house  and  be 
aspected  by  benefic  planets,  there  will  be  no  early  death. 

14.  If  all  the  planets  occupy  the  Sirodaja  signs,  there 
will  be  no  early  death. 

15.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  a  benefic  planet  successful 
in  planetary  fight  (conjunction)  bo  aspected  by  another 
benefio  planet,   there  will  be  no  early  death. 

16.  If  the  full  Moon  be  aspected  by  all  the  planets, 
there  will  be  no  early  death. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

On  Ayuedaya  or  The  Determination  of  the  Length  of  Lieb 

1.  According  to  Maya,  Yayanacharya,  Manittha  and 
Parasara,  the  maximum  number  of  the  years  of  the  Sun 
the  Moon  and  planets  are  respectively  19,  25,  15,  12,  15,  21 
and  20  when  the  planets  are  in  their  exaltation  degrees. 

Notes. 
In    this  chapter  are  given  several  methods  for  deter- 


I> 

}> 

>i 

>> 

n 

JJ 

a 

>i 

9J 

i> 

>i 

>i 

>^ 

;> 

99 

25 

*# 

^> 

9f 

15 

>> 

fj 

9» 

12 

h 

99 

9i 

15 

}9 

>9 

99 

21 

|9 

>f 

99 

20 

60  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [oB.  7. 

miDiog  the  length  of  human  and  other  animal  life  from  the 
planetary  positions  at  the  time  of  birth.  The  author  first 
proceeds    to  state  what  is  known  as  Pindayurdaya. 

The  years  given  by  the  Sun  when  in  his  exaltation 

degree  is  19. 
Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Sivturn 

The  exaltation  signs  with  the  exaltation  degrees  of  the 
several  planets  are  given  in  stanza  13^  Ch  L 

Before  the  length  of  life  can  be  ascertained^  the  years 
given  above  have  to  be  subjected  to  various  reduotions> 

.  2.  If  the  planets  are  in  their  depression  degrees,  their 
years  will  be  one-half  of  those  stated  above ;  if  in  any  other 
places^  the  years  shall  be  obtained  by  proportion(a).  The 
number  of  years  given  by  Lagna  is  the  same  as  the  number 
of  Navamsas  of  the  rising  sign  that  may  have  risen  above 
the  horizon(&).  According  to  6ome(c)  the  number  of 
years  given  by  Lagna  is  the  number  of  signs  between  the 
first  point  of  Aries  and  the  Lagna(£2).  Again>  if  a  planet 
be  in  an  inimioal  sign,  he  loses  a  third  of  his  perL0(1(e) ;  if 
he  be  an  Astangata(/)  planet,  he  loses  one-half;  but  no 
reduction  need  be  made  in  the  case  of  Mars  (g)  occupying  an 
inimical  sign,  or  in  the  case  of  Saturn  and  Yenus  being  As- 
taugata  planets. 

.  •  Notes, 

(a).  Suppose/for  instance,  the  Sun  to  occupy  the  2 1st 
degree  of  Sagittari.  Required  his  years.  The  exaltation  de- 
gree of  the  Sun  is  the  10th  degree  of  Aries  and  his  depress- 
sion  degree  is  the  10th  degree  of  Libra  When  in  .  the 
latter  degree  the  number  of  years  of  the   Sun  will  be  ono 


OH.  7.]  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  61 

half  of  what  it  Is  in  tho  former  degree,  ie*^  ftne-half  of  19  or  9 1 
years.  From  the  10th  degree  of  Libra  to  the  10th  degree 
of  Aries  is  180  degrees.     So  that  every  degree  gives  us  9^ 

years.  Now  from  the  lOfch  degree  of  Libra  totbe2Ist 
degree  of  Sagittarii8  2  sigasand  11  degrees  ue^  60+  11  or  71 
degrees.  71  degrees  give  us    7l  X    ^i    years  =  3  years,  K  » 

months  and  29  days.  Adding  this  to  9|  years,  we  get  13 
years^  5  months  and  29  days.  The  years  of  the  other  pla- 
nets may  be  similarly  ascertained.  These  years  are  subject 
to  ceiiiain  reductions  as  will  be  seen  further  on* 

(h).  The  author  gives  here  what  is  known  as  Lagna- 
yurdaya,  that  in,  the  rising  sign  gives  a  number  of  years  in 
the  same  way  as  the  planets  do.  A  sign  of  Zodiac  consist- 
ing of  nine  Navamsas  gives  us  9  years.  So  that  if  the  lOth 
degree  of  Leo  be  risings  the  number  of  years  given  by 
Lagna  ^  X  9  years  =  8  years. 


(c).     Some :  Manittha  and  men  of  his  school. 


.'t 


{d).  In  other  words  each  sign  of  the  Zodiac  gives  a 
year ;  so  that  if  the  10th  degree  of  Leo,  the  5th  sign  from 
ArieSj  be  rising,  the  number  of  years  given  by  Lng^a  =  4  +  iJ 
years  =  4  years,  4  months.  The  Commentator  adds  that 
in  the  case  of  Lagnayurdaya,  the  rule  given  in  note(6) 
should  be  followed,  if  the  lord  of  the  rising  Ndvamsa  be 
powerful,  and  that  given  in  this  note  should  be  followed  if 
the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  be  powerful. 

(e).     Planetary  period  ascertained  as  per  noteCa). 

(/).  A  planet  is  said  to  be  an  Astangata  one  when 
he  disappears  within  a  particular  limit  from  the  Sun, 
his  light  being  then  obscured  by  the  light  of  the  Sun.  This 
limit  varies  with  different  planets.  In  direct  course,  dis- 
appearance and  re-appearance  take  place  as  follows  : 


62  BRIHIT  JATAKA7  [«K.   7- 


ara  wlien'witlnn  l7  degrees  from  tlie  Sun. 


»        II        i» 


II  91  19 

I »  ^»  >l 


(Mercury      , 14  , 

(^ But  when   retrograde  12  „  „        ,> 

Jupiter      11  „  ^,        ,1 

f  Yenu3            10  ,,  J,        yy 

\  But  j\  when    retrograde  8  „  „        ,, 

Saturn                 15 

The  Moon         12 

{g).    The     word  used  in  the  text  is  Vakra;  this  is 

nterpreted  to     mean  Mars  by  some  and  into  '^  a  planet  of 

ret ropjrade  motion"  by  others.  So  thatj ''according  to  the 
latter^no  reduction  for  being  in  an  inimical  sign  need  be  made 
from  his  years  if  the  planet  be  retrograde^in  motion.  In 
this  view  Yaraha  Mihira  concurs.  But  the  other  view  has 
the  support  of  Badarayana. 

S.  If  malefic  planets  occupy  the  12 th^  llth^lOtb,  9th^ 
8tb,  or  7fch  house  from  the  risiug  sign^  a  reduction  in  full, 
one  of  one-half,  one-third^one-fifth  and  one-sixth  shall  be 
made  respectively  in  the  years  obtained.  If  the  planets 
occupying  the  said  houses  be  benefic  one§,  the  reduction 
will  only  be  one-half  (a)  of  what  was  stated  for^.each 
But  if  several  planets  occupy  a  single  sign,  the  reduction 
shall  be  made  for  the  most  powerful  one.  This  is  accoi*ding 
to  Satyacharya.(6) 

Notes. 

(a).   .Where  the  amount  of  reduction  was  stated  to  be 

full  in  tho  case  of  a  malefic  planet,  it  is  only  one-half  in  the 

case  of  a  benoiic  planet ;  whoro  it  was  stated  to  bo  one-half 

in  tho  former  case,  it  is  only  one-fourth  in     the  latter  case, 

and  so  forth. 

Q))m    In  this  view  Varaha  Mihira  concurs. 
4.    If  a  malefic    planet  occupy    the  rising     sign,  then 
multiply  the  tota,l  number  of  years  already  obtained   by  tho 


CH.    7.]  IlRIiriT  JATAKA*  03 

number  of  Navamsas  befcweon  tbo  firsfc  point  of  Av^cs  find 
the  Lagna  of  the  rising  Navamsaand  divide  the  product 
hy  108.  The  qnotient  itrillbe  the  number  of  yeaw  to  be 
subtracted  (a)  from  the  total  number  of  years  already  ob- 
tained({i).  But  if  the  malefio  planet  be  aspected  by  a  bene- 
fic  one,  the  amount  of  reduction  will  only  be^  oue-faalf 
of  what  was  stated  above. 

Notes. 

(a).    The  reduction  is   known     as    Krurodayaharana. 

(6).  According  to  some  the  number  of  years  of  reduc- 
tion i3  obtained  by  multiplying  the  total  number  of  years 
already  obtained  by  the  number  of  Navamsas  of  the  rising 
sign  that  have  risen  above  the  horizon  and  dividing  tho 
product  by  108,  the  total  number  of  Navamsas  of  the 
Zodiac. 

5.    The    maximum   length  of  life  of  man  and  the  ele« 

phant  is  120  years  and  H  days,  that  of  the  horse  is  32  years, 

that  of  the  ass  and  the  camel  is  25  years,' that  of  the  buffalo 

and    the    ox    is     24    yearSf    that     of  the     dog "!  (a)  is 

f2  years,  and  that  of  the  goat  and  the    like(&)  is  16  years•'1^ 

Notes, 

To  find  out  the  length  of  life  of  an  animal.  Make  the  calcu* 
lation  as  for  a  man  and  multiply  the  result  by  the  maximum 

period  of  life  of  the  particular  animal  and  divide  tho  pro- 
duct by  120  years  and  5  days.  The  result  will  be  the  length 
of  life  of  the  animal  requirod. 

(a).    Dog  and  animals  with  claws* 

(&).     Goat,  the  deer  and  the  like. 

6.  The  length  of  life  of  a  person  born  when  the  last 
Navamsa  of  Piscos  is  rising,  when  Mercury  has  just  passed 
25  minutes  in  sign  Taurus  and  whon  all  tho  other  planets 
occupy  their  exaltation  signs  is  the  maximum  period  of  120 
years  and  5  /lays 

9 


6i 


BSIHIT  JATAKA* 

Notes. 


In.  7. 


The  horoficope  referred  to  in  the  text  is  given  below. 


Venus. 
Lagna. 

Sun. 

Moon. 
Mercury. 

Easi  Chakra* 

_ ( 

Jupiter. 

1 

Mars. 

■ 

Saturn. 

As  all  planets  ezceptingMercury  are  io  their  exaltation 
signs  (and  in  their  exaltation  degrees  as  supposed  by  the 
Commentator)  the  years  given  by  such  planets  are  the  maxi- 
mum years  assigned  to  them.  The  maximum  number  of 
years  ofMercury  when  in  his  exaltation  degree,  viz.,  the  15th 
degree  of  YirgQ  is  12,  and  when  in  his  depression 
degree^  viz.,  the  15fch  degree  of  Hsoas^  is  6.  The  re* 
maining  15  degrees  of  Pisces  give  us  6  months.  Sign  Aries 
gives  us  a  year.  Now  the  first  degree  of  Taurus  gives  12 
days  and  therefore  25  minutes  of  the  1st  degree  give  us^X 
25  =  6  days.  So  that  the  years  of  Mercury  =  6  years  +  6 
months  +  1  year  +  5  days  =  7  years,  6  months  and  5  days. 

A{?ain,  as  the  end  of  sign  Pisces  was  rising,  according 
to  the  Commentator  the  nine  Navamsas  of  sign  Pisces  give 
us  9  years ;  so  that  we  have  the  following  s 

Jupiter 

Venus 

Saturn 


The  Sun  .49  yrs- 
TheMoon..25„ 

Mars'       ...15  „ 

Mercury  ...7  yrs,6  ms.  5  ds. 


» •  • 


15  yrg. 
•••  21     „ 

...  20 
9 


•  •• 


V 
9» 


Lagua 

Now  a  reduction  known  as  Cbakrapataharana  is  to  be 
laade  from  the  years  of  Mars  and  Saturn,  these  two  being 


CH.  7.]  B&IHAT  JATAKA.  65* 

malefio  planetSi  the  former  oconpying  tbe  lUIi  house  and 
the  latter  the  8th  house  from  the  risiog  Bigu.'^The  amouut 
of  reduction  therefore  is   one-half  in  the  case  of  Mars  and 
ono-fifth  in  the  case  of  Saturn.    AecordiDgly  after  making 
the  reduction^  the  years  of  Mars  will  be  7i  and   those  of 
Saturn  will  be  16.     £6ductions   known  as  Satrukshetra- 
harana^  Astangata  harana  and  Krurodaya  harana  have  not  to 
be  made  in  this  case*    The  lesalting  years  therefore  are— - 

Years.    Months.     Days* 
The   Sun  ...  ...  19 

Tbe   Moon  ...  ...  25 

Mais  ...  ...  7 

Mercury  ,..  ...  7 

Jupiter  ...  ...  15 

Venus  ...  ...  21 

Saturn  ...  ...  16* 

Lasrna  ...  ...  9 


... 


.* 


••• 


...  V  ...  «•• 


Total  length  of  life      ...  120  ...  5 

7.  This  Piudayurdaya  method  has  also  been  treated 
of  by  Yishnugupta  (a)>  Devaswami  and  Siddhasena.  Reject- 
ing the  age  of  8^  the  period  of  Balarishtaor  early  death  {b), 
the  main  fault  in  this  Pindayurdaya  ia  that  in  no  case  it 
gives  us  years  less  than  20  (c). 


Notes. 

(a).     Visbnugupta  is  otherwise  known  as  Chanakya. 

(6).     To  which  none  of  the  Ayurdaya  rules  apply. 

(c).  The  Commentator  conaiders  that  this  stanza  is  not 
the  author's;  the  objection  to  Pindayurduya  raised  in  it  ho 
meets  as  follows  by  proving  that  Pindayurdaya  does  give 
years  below  20.  He  takes  the  following  horoscope.  The 
first  Navamsa  of  Aquarius  is  the  Lagna.  'J'he  Sun,  the  Moon 
and  Venus  occupy  their  exaltation  degi  ocs  j  Mercury,  Jupiter* 


66 


BRIHAT  JATAKA* 


[CH-    7. 


and  Saturn  occupy  their  depression  degrees^  and  Mars  occu- 
pies the  28th  degree  of  sign  Aquarius. 


Venus 
'Mertfilry. 


Mars. 
Lugna. 


Sun. 
Saturn. 


Moon. 


Jfupiter. 


Rasi  Chukra. 


Now  as  the  Sun,  the  Moon  and  Venus  are  in  their  exal- 
tation degrees,  their  years  are  respectively  19,  25  and  21  ; 
and  as  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn  occupy  their  depression 
degrees,  their  years  are  one-half  of  their  maximum  years^ 
that  is  one-half  of  12,  15  and  20  or  6,7a~  and  10  respectively. 
Now  the  28th  degree  of  Capricorn  is  the  exaltation  degree 
of  Marsi-and  as  he  occupies  the  28th  degree  of  Aquarius,  he 
is  removed  from  the  exaltation  degree  by  exac.Wy  30  degrees. 
His  maximum  number  of  years  wLeu  in  the  28th  degree 
of  Capricorn  being  16  ;  30  degrees  or  a  sign  gives  us  il  or 
year  and  3  months.  Subtracting  this  from  15  years  we 
get  13  years  and  9  months  as  tho  yeai*s  of  Mars.  As  sign 
Aquarius  was  just  rising  Lagna  gives  us  no  years;  so  that 
at  this  stage  the  planetary  years  stand  as  follows  : 


The  Sun      19  years. 
The  Moon  25 
Venus         21 


Mercury  6  years. 
Jupiter    7  years  G  ms. 
Saturn    10      ,> 


and  Mars  IH  years  9  months.  Now  as  Jupiter,  a  benefic  planet 
occupies  the  12th  house  from  the  rising  sign,  his  years 
a  (Fer  a  reduction  of  one-half  of  their  length  ;  so  that;  after 


Ctt.  7.]  fintUAT  JlTAEA.  07 

the  reduction^  he  gives  ns  only  3  years  and  9  months, 
^gain,  as  all  the  planets  occupy  friendly  signs^  no  Sutru- 
£lshetraharana  need  be  made.  Saturn  being  within  10 
degrees  from  the  Sun  is  an  Astangata  planet  and  therefore 
his  years  suffer  a  reduction  of  one  half^  So  that  aihe^  tb9^ 
p»d««ti>»i»>  he  gives  ns  tS years.  Thus  we  have  the  follow* 
ing* 


The  Sun  Ig  years. 

The  Moon       25     ... 
Venus  21     ... 


Mercury    ^  years. 
Jupiter      8      ys.   9  ms- 
Satnrn  iO  &  yearSj 


Mars  13  years  9  months. 

Total  98^yeais  6  months, 
i^ow  as  Marsj  a  malefio  pluneti  occupies  the  rising  signi 
the  total  number  of  OflTyears  and  6  months  have  to  be  sub- 
jected to  a  deduction  known  as  Krurodaj'a  harana<  In 
other  words  the  108  Navamsas  of  theecliptio  represent  the 
total  number   of  years.     Now  there  are  10  X  9  =  90  Na. 

vamsas  between  the  first  point  of  Aries  and  the   first   point 
of  Aquaris.  The  quantity  of  reduction  therefore  is  /(/V  ^  ^^ 
years  and    6    months.      Therefore    the    years     remaining 
after  the  reduction  =  tVV  ^  93ryears  and  6  mouths  =  1^ 
years   and  vmonths,  the  length   of  life  required.    This  of 
course  is  less  than  20  years. 

8.  To  the  very  yoga  to  which  the  maximum  length  of 
life  has  been  assigned,  certain  astrologers  (a)  have  ascribed 
the  life  of  a  king.  There  is  an  evident  error  in  Hms. 
Another  error  is  that  persons  (born  under  the  yoga  of  a 
sovereign)  are  often  found  to  live  long  and  poor. 

Notes. 

(a.)  S^uch  as  Badarayana  and  Yavaneswara. 

The  obiection  amounts  to  this  : 

That  the    very  yoga   which,  according  to  Pindayurdnya 
is  said  to  give  a  person  the  raaximutn  length  of  lite  is  const* 


6S  BBIHAT  JATAKl.  [tJH.   7. 

dered  by  certain  astrologers  as  Baja  Yoga.  In  either 
Case  several  planets  cccupy  tbeir  exaltation  signs  (vide 
stauza  1,  Chapter  X[.)  The  Commentator  considers  this 
stanza  toO)  not  as  the  anther^,  the  objection  raised  being 
an  absurd  one.  For,  it  is  wrong  to  suppose  that  a  particular 
yoga  cannot  be  both  a  yoga  for  long  life  and  one  for  the 
life  of  a  sovereign.  The  other  objection  raised  in  the  text  is 
evidently  a  frivolous  one  and  ought  to  be  proved  before  it 
can  be  met 

9.  According  So  Joevasarma  the  maximum  number  of 
years  for  each  planet  when  in  his  exaltation  sign  and  degree 
is  one-seventh  of  the  maximum  length  of  human  life — 120 
years  and  5  days, — which  is  17  years,  1  month>  22  days,  and 
y^  ghatikas.  (a)  In  this  view  Jeevasarma  stands  alone  and 
is  not  supported  by  other  authorities.  According  to  Satya. 
eharya,  the  planetary  years  are  the  same  as  the  number  of 
Navamsas  passed  over  by  each  planet  (&>  This  view  has  the 
support  of  many  authorities. 

Notes* 
(a.)   Just  as  in  PindaynrdHya>  the  several  reductions  are  to 
bo  made  and  then  the  resulting  length  of  life  ascertained. 

(/>).   Counting  from   the  Navamsa  of  Aries  immediately 
preceding  ;  so  that  no  planet  can  give  more  than  12  years. 

10.  According  to  Satyacharya^  convert  the  Sphuta  or 
longitude  of  the  planet  into  minutes  ;  divide  the  number  o^ 
ininutuci  by  ^00  ;  the  quotient  will  roprosont  the  number  of 
Navanisas  passed  over  by  tho  planet  from  the  first  point  of 
Aries.  Divide  this  by  i2,  the  remainder  will  give  the  number 
of  Navamsas  from  tho  Navamsa  of  Aries  the  number  is 
also  the  number  of  years  and  fraction  of  a  year  for 
the  planet. 

Notes.  ' 

Suppose    the  longitude  of  the  Sun  to  be  115  degiees   Is 


CH.  7.]  •  bbihAt  jataka.  6» 

» 

minnfces.  This  converted  into  minutes  gives  6,913  minutes^ 
Now  as  a  Navamsa  contains  200  minutes  tbe  num_ 
ber  of  Navamsas  passed  over  by  the  Sun  from  the 
first  point  of  Aries  =  VttV  =  34^^  Dividiner  this 
by  12,  we  get  as  remainder  lO^^  NAvamsns  from  tlie  next 
preceding  Navamsa  of  Aries-  This  then  represents  the 
years  of  tlie  Sun  which  will  be  found  to  bo  lO  years, 
C  montus  23  days  and  24  ghatikas  ;  and  so  on  for  each 
planet. 

11.  Again,  if  any  planet  occupies  its  exaltation 
sign  or  is  retrogrnde  in  its  motion,  the  years  assigned 
to  it,  shall  be  trebled  ;  and  if  tbe  planet  be  in  its  Var- 
gottama  or  Navamsa  or  Swakshetra  or  Dnekkana,  its 
years  shall  be  doubled^  The  above  is  a  special  feature 
in  Satyacharyar's  Ayurdaya.  In  other  respects,  it  resembles 
the  Pindayurdaya — the  several  i^uotions(a)  already  refer- 
red to  apply  to  the  present  case. 

Notesr 
(a).    Tlie  reduction   known     as     Krnrodaya   harana 
4oes  not  apply  to  Satyacharyar's  method.   (Vide  stanza  12), 

12.  According  {b  Satyacharya  the  years,  months,  &.c. 
for  the  Lagoa,  the  rising  degree,are  the  same  as  the  number 
of  Navamsas  passed  over  (a)  (as  in  the  case  of  the  planets); 
but  if  the  rising  sign  be  powerful(&),  then,  the  number  of 
signs  passed.over  represents  the  3^ears,  months,  &c.  The 
reduction  known  as  Krurodayaharana  does  not  apply  to 
Satyaoharyar's  method.  In  the  case  of  the  other  reduotioos 
the  years  given  in  the  first  stanza  ought  not  to  ho  employ- 
ed(c). 

Notes. 

(a).    Beginning  from  the    next  preoeding  Navamsa  of 
Ariest     ' 


70  BRIHAT  JATAKA»  [CH.    7» 

(&)•     As  siated  in  stanza  I9>  Ck  L 

(c).  That  is  the  special  years  of  each  planet  according 
to  Satyacharya^s  method  ought  to  be  subjected  to  the  several 
reductions. 

13.  In  the  matter  of  Ayurdaya,  the  method  of  Satya- 
Charya  is  the  best.  Objection  is  made  to  it  on  the  ground 
that  the  planatery  years  have  to  be  multiplied  several  times(a) 
This  is  wrong ;  where  any  period  has  to  be  multiplod 
by  several  numbers^  it  will  be  sufficient  if  the  period  is 
multiplied  by  the  largest  number(Z^}. 

Notes. 

(a).  Suppose  Mercury  to  occupy  sign  Virgo  which  is 
his  exaltation  sign  as  well  as  his  house. 

It  would  seem  that  under  stanza  11^  Mercury ^s  years 
should  first  be  trebled  and  then  doubled.  Is  this  to  bo 
done  7  Again,  suppose  Mercury  to  occupy  the  last  Navamsa 
of  sign  Virgo  which  is  his  Vargotama  position.  His  years, 
it  would  appear,  have  to  be  doubled  on  that  account* Already 
we  found  that  for  being  in  his  bouse^  his  years  had  to 
be  doubled.  The  question  is  whether  the  years  of  Mercury 
have  bo  be  doubled  twice*  Again,  suppose  Mercury  while 
occupying  Virgo^  his  exaltation  sign,  is  also  retrograde  in 
his  motion  for  which  his  years  have  to  be  trebled*  Are  his 
years  then  to  be  trebled  twice*    No. 

(h).  If  any  period  has  to  be  doubled  twice  or  thricci 
it  will  be  enough  if  it  be  doubled  but  once,  and  where  the 
period  has  to  be  trebled  twice  or  thrice^  it  will  bo  enough  if  it 
be  trebled  but  once.  Again ^  if  any  period  has  to  be  both 
doubled  and  trebled,  it  will  be  enough  if  it  be  only  trebled 

14,  The  life  of  a  person  born  when  sign  Cancer  is  ris- 
ingi  when  Jupiter  and  the  Moon  occupy  such  rising  sign, 
when  Mercury  and  Venus  opcupy  the  KendrgiS  and  the  other 


CH.    7.]  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  71 

pbinets  oocnp7  the  llib,6ih  and  8rd  honaes  is  not  subject  to 
ordinary  calculation,  but  far  exceeds  the  maximum  period 
of  normal  human  esistence(c)* 

Notes. 

(a).  In  other  words,  the  ordinary  -^yurdaya  rules  for 
ascertaining  the  length  of  a  man's  life  do  not  apply  to  the 
horoscope  mentioned  in  tlie  text.  For  further  particulars 
vide  Chapter  IX.     Notes. 

Notes : — It  may  be  interesting  to  quote  here  a  few  horos- 
copes of  the  nature  of  the  one  referred  to  in  the  last  stanza 
to  which  the  ordinary  Ayurdaya  rules  do  not  apply.  These 
are  mainly  the  horoscopes  of  eminent  sages  who  are  suppos- 
ed to  live  for  several  centuries. 

(1).  The  rising  sign  is  Leo  and  Jupiter  occupies  it> 
Venus  occupies  Cancer,  Mercury  the  2od  house  Virgo,  and 
the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  Upachaya  places^  viz.,  the 
8rd,  6th,  10th,  and  11th  houses.  A  person  born  in  the 
above  yoga  will  live  for  1,000  years. 

(2).  The  Sun  and  Mars  occupy  the  4th  house  from  the 
ascendant ;  Saturn  occupies  the  rising  sign,  Bahu  the  l2th 
house  and  the  other  planets  the  8th  house.  A  person  born 
in  the  above  Yoga  will  live  for  2,000  years. 

(3),  The  rising  sign  is  Aries,  and  the  Sun  occupies  it. 
Saturn  occupies  the  4th  or  the  9th  house.  Mars  the  7th 
house,  and  powerful  Moon  the  12th  house.  A  person  born 
in  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  2,000  yeare  by  the  power  of 
drugs. 

(4).     The  rising  sign  is  Sagittavi  or  Pisces,  and  Jupi- 
ter occupies  it ;  sign  Gemini  is  unoccupied  and  Venus  occu- 
pies one  of  the  Kendra  houses.    A  person  born  in  the  above 
yoga  will  live  for  a  great  number   of   years  by  the  power  of 
drugs  and  will  attain  the  position  of  Indra. 

10 


f%  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [OH.    7, 

(5),  If  all  the  planets  oocqpy  either  a  single  sign  op 
the  Trikoha  or  the  Kend^a  houses,  a  person  born  in  the 
yoga  will  either  die  immediately  after  birth  or  live  for  a 
yoga  by  the  power  of  7?ian<rair, 

6.  If  maleiio  planets  do  not  occupy  the  Trikona  houses, 
benefic  planets  do  not  occupy  the  Kendra  houses,  and  if  the 
8th  house  be  not  occupied  by  a  maleiio  planet,  a  person 
born  in  the  yoga  will  become  a  Deva. 

7.  The  rising  sign  is  Taurus  and  Yenus  occupies  it. 
Jupiter  occupies  one  of  the  !E^endra  houses  and  the  other 
planets  occupy  the  Svd,  6ih  and    11th  houses.     A  person. 

born  under  the  yoga  will  beoome   a    Peya    after  living  for  a 
great  number  of  years  by  the  power  of  drugs  and  mantras. 

8.  The  rising  sign  is  Cancer;  Baturn  ocenpiea  sign 
Libra ;  Jupiter  occupies  Capricorn  )  and  the  Moon  occupies 
Taurus.  A  person  born  uader  the  yoga  attains  the  position 
of  Brahma  after  living  a  great  many  years  by  the  strength 
of  drugs  and  mantras. 

9.  The  rising  sign  is  Cancer  and  Cancer  is  also  th^ 
rising  Nayamsa ;  Jupiter  occupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses  ; 
Mars  the  7th  house  ;  and  Venus  is  in  Simhasanamsa(a)« 
A  person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live  long  by  the  power 
of  drugs* 

10.  The  rising  Navamsa  is  the  last  Navamsa  of  sign 
Virgo  and  Mercury  occupies  it  ;  Jupiter  occupies  the  7th 
house  and  is  in  Gopuramsa  or  Saturn  is  in  Alridvamsa.. 
A  person  born  under  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  an  infi- 
nite number  of  years% 

11.  Venus  is  in  Devalokamsa;  MaxB  in  one  of  the 
Kendra  houses  and  Jupiter  is  also  in  one  of  the  Kendra 
houses  and  is  in  Simhasanamsa.  A  person  born  in  the 
above  yoga  will  livo  for  a  countless  number  of  years. 

•  *  •  ■ 

(a).  For  an  explanation  of  these  Amsas  or  planetHsry 
positions,  vide  the  note  at  theendt 


OH.  7«]  ABlHAt  JATAKAft  ?3 

12.  Venus  oc()upies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses  and  is 
in  Vargottaraa  position  and  in  PHt*avatamsa ;  Jupiter  occu- 
pies  one  of  the  Kendra  hottses  and  is  in  Swargalokamsai 
A  person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  a  oountless 
number  of  years  by  the  power  of  drugs» 

13.  ttupiter  occupies  one  of  ihe  Kendra  houses^  and  is 
in  Oopnratnsa ;  Venus  ocbupies  one  of  the  l^rikona  kouses 
lind  is  in  Paravatamsa  and  the  risidg  sign  is  Cancer ;  it 
pei*son  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  a  ybga. 

14.  The  rising  sign  is  Can()er  and  Jupiter  occupies  it 
lind  is  in  the  Navamsa  of  Sngittari  and  2  or  3  planets 
occupy  the  Kendras.  A  person  born  in  the  above  yoga 
will  live  long  and  attain  the  position  of   Brahma. 

15.  Venus  occupies  the  8rd  or  11th  house  and  is  in 
Gopura  or  other  AmsaSj  and  the  rising  Navamsa  is  Taurus 
of  sign  TaurilSi  A  pei^son  bom  in  the  above  yoga  will  live 
long  and  attain  the  position  of  Bl*ahmai 

16.  Vonus  ocdnpies  tbe  rising  sign  ^  Jupiter  the  7th 
iiouse;the  Moon/ sign  Virgo,  and  the  rising  Navamsa  is 
Aries  of  sign  Sagittari.  A  person  born  in  the  above  yoga 
will  obtain   salvation^ 

17.  Mercury  occupies  the  5th  hoitse  and  is  in  Gopurn 
or  other  amsas ;  the   rising  sign  is   Aquarius  and   Jupitei* 

occupies  it.     A  person  botn  in  the  above   yoga   will  attain 
the  position  of  Brahma. 

18.  Jupiter  occupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses.  Saturn 
Occupies  the  11th  house.     The  Sun  occupies  the  2nd  house 

,  Gl-ulika  (the  higher  apsis  of  a  planet's  course)  occupies  the 
7  th  house  and  Mars  occupies  the  9th  house*  A  pei*sou  born 
iu  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  a  yuga. 

19 i     Jupiter  and  Mercury  are  in  the  Trikona  houses  j 


74  BBIHAT  JATAkA.  [oH.    7 

the  rittiDg  sign  is  Taurus  and  Mars  oocupies  it  and  the 
Moou  is  in  Gopuramsa.  A  person  born  in  the  above  yoga 
will  live  for  2,000  years. 

20.  Jupiter  oocupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses  ',  the 
rising  sign  is  Cuncer,  Mars  oocupies  the  7th  house  and 
Saturn  the  4th  house;  the  time  of  birth  is  the  light  Iialf 
of  bhe  month.  If  the  birth  of  a  person  occurs  in  the  above 
yoga  and  by  day  he  will  live  for  10,000  years. 

21.  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Mars  and  Venus  oooupy  the  Ken- 
dras  and  are  mutually  in  Kendra  positions  to  one  another, 
or  tbey  all  ocoapy  the  Trikona  houses.  A  person  born  in 
either  of  the  above  yogas  will  live  for  10,000  years. 

22.  Benefic  planets  occupy  the  Kendras  ;  Malefic  pla- 
nets occupy  the  3rd,  6th,  and  11th  houses;  the  rising  sign 
is  Leo  and  Jupiter  occupies  it.  A  person  born  in  the 
above  yoga  will  live  for  00,000  years. 

23.  The  rising  sign  js  Capricorn  and  planets  from 
Mars  to  the  Sun  occupy  it  excepting  Jupiter  who  occupies 

the  8rd  house.     A  person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live 

for  a  Kalpa. 

24.  The  last  Navamsa  of  sign  Aries  is  the  rising  Na- 
vamsa  and  Jupiter  or  Venus  occupies  it ;  the  Moon  occu- 
pies the  5th  Navamsa  of  Taurus  or  Sagittari  or  Mars  is  in 
Simhasanamsa.  A  person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will 
live  for  a  countless  number  of  years. 

25.  The  Suu  and  Mercury  occupy  fixed  signs  j  the 
Moon  oocupies  sign  TauruSj  and  Venus  sign  Gemini ;  the 
rising  sign  is  Cancer  and  Jupiter  oocupies  ifc>  or  the  rising 
sign  is  Libra  and  Saturn  occupies  it,  A  person  born  in  the 
above  yoga  will  beoome  a  Muni  or  a  Ilishi. 

23.  The  Moon  is  in  Devalokamsa  ;  Mars  is  in  Paravat- 
amsa ;  the  Sun  is  in  the  rising  sign  and  in  Simhasanamsa 
A  person  bom  in  the  above  yoga  will  beoome  a  Muni  or  a 
Bishi. 


OH.    7]  .     BBIHAT  JATAKA.  75 

27.  Tfao  Sna  oocupios  sign  Arios  ;  Jupifcer  either  the 
9fcli  house  or  sign  Cancer  and  the  malefic  planets  occupy 
the  3rd,  6th,  and  llth  houses.  A  person  born  in  the  above 
yoga  will  become  a  Muni. 


Ameas  explained* 
In  Chapter  I  we  have  referred  to  the  six  modes  of  di- 
vision of  the  Ecliptic  known  as  Shadvarga*  Ceitaiu  writers 
have  four  more  divisions  known  as  Saptamamsa,  Dasamsai 
Shodasamsa  and  ShaBhtyamsa*  These  ten  divisions  of  the 
eoh'ptic  are  known  as  Dasavarga. 

Saptamamsa  is  division  of  a  sign  of  the  Zodiac  into  7 
equal  parts.  The  lords  of  the  7  parts  of  the  odd  signs  are 
respectively  the  lords  of  the  7  signs  of  the  Zodiac  comroen* 
oing  from  the  odd  sign  j  and  the  lords  of  the  7  parts  of  tho 
even  signs  are  respectively  the  lords  of  the  7  signs  of  the 
Zodiac  beginning  from  the  7th  sign  from  the  even  sign. 

Dasamsa  is  division  of  a  sign  of  tho  Zodiac  iiito   10 

equal  parts.  The  lords  of  the  10  parts  of  the  odd  signs  are 
respectively  the  lords  of  the  10  signs  of  the  Zodiac  com- 
mencing from  the  odd  sign,  and  the  lords  of  the  10  parts  of 
the  even  signs  are  respectively  the  lords  of  the  10  signs 
commencing  from  the  10th  sign  from  the  even  sign. 

Shodasamsa  is  division  of  a  sign  of  iho  ecliptic  into  16 
equal  parts.  The  lords  of  the  16  parts  of  the  odd  signs 
are  the  lords  of  the  12  sign,s  commercing  from  the  odd  sign 
together  with  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra  and  Suryaj  the 
lords  of  the  16  parts  of  the  even  signs  are  the  lords  of  the 
12  signs  commencing  from  the  oven  signs  together  with 
Suryo,  Rudra,  Vishnu  and  Brahma. 

Shashtyamsa  is  division  of  a  sign  of  the  ecliptic  into  60 
equal  parts.    The  60  parts  of  the  odd  signs  are  those  of 


76 


J3B1HAT  JATAEA* 


[oh.  8 


1.  GhoVa. 

2.  BMkshasn. 
8k  Deva* 

4.  Kubora. 

6.  llakHbogana, 
6-  Kinnara. 

7.  Bhrashta. 

8.  Kulaghtia. 
0.  Garala. 

10.  Agni. 

11.  Maya. 


21.  Padma. 

22.  Lakshroi. 

23.  Vageesa. 

24.  Digambara, 

25.  Dova. 
2G,  Ardra. 

27.  Kalinasa. 

28.  Kshitiswara. 

29.  Kamalakara. 
SO.  Mandatmaja. 
31.  Mrifcyu. 


12.  Pretapureesa.32.  Kala. 

13.  Apampati.      3B«  Davagni. 

14.  Devaganesa.   84.  Ghora* 


1?S.  Kala. 
16.  Alii. 
17*  Amritamsa. 
18.  Chandra. 

19   Mrida« 
20.  Koinala. 


85.  Amaya. 
SG.  Kantaka^ 
87.  Sudha. 
88.  Amrita< 


41.  Kalinasa. 

42.  Mukhya. 

43.  Yamsaksliayai 
44*.  Utpatakai 

45.  Kiila-rnpai 

46.  Soumya. 

47.  Mridu. 

48.  Sasitala. 

49.  Damshtr&karatai 

50.  Indumukha. 

51.  Pravina. 

52.  Kalagni. 

5?.  Dandayudbai 
f>4.  Kirmala^ 

55.  Subhai 

56.  Asubha. 

57.  Atisitala. 


58.  Sudha. 

894  Poomachandra.  59.  Payodhibhramana^ 
40.  Yishapradigdba.  60.  Indurokha. 
And  the  60  parts  of  the  even    signs  are  the  above  in 
the  inverse  order>  that  is^  beginning  from  Indurekha  and 


endiDg  in  Ghora. 

Now  a  planet  which  occupies  his  particulat  house,  Na- 
vamsa,  Uwadasamsa^  l^rimsamsa>  &6.,  is  said  to  be  in  his 
Varga.  A  planet  occupying  two  Vargas  is  said  to  be  in 
Parijatamsa  j  if  lie  occupies  three  Vargas^  he  is  said  to  be  in 
Uttamainsa ;  If  fouV  yargas,  in  Gopuramsa  ;  if  five  vargas 
in  Simhanamsa  j  if  six,  in  Paravatarasa  j  if  seven  or  eight, 
in  Devalokamsa  j  if  nine,  in  Airavatam^  a  j  and  if  ten,  In 
Vaiseshikamsa. 


dM 


CH.    8]  BBIHAT  JATAKA*    '  77 

CHAPTEB  VIII. 
On  PiiANBTARY  Divisions  and  Sub-Divisions  of'  L\n 

Known  As  Dasas  and  Antaroasas. 

1.  Determine  fir^^t  which  of  the  following  three  is 

powerful-^-the  Rising  Sign,  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  His  pe- 
riod comes  first.  Then  follow  the  periods  of  tha  planets 
occupyinpr  the  Kendra  houses,  from  such  powerful  rising 
sign  or  the  Sun  or  the  Moon.  Then  come  the  periods  of 
the  planets  occupying  the  Panaphara  houses  from  the  same, 
and  lastly  come  the  periods  of  planets  occupying  the  Apok- 
lima  houses(a)'  If  there  be  no  planets  in  the  Kendra  or 
Panaphara  or  Apoklima  houses,  then  the  periods  of  the 
other  planets  come  in  the  order  stated. 

Notes, 
(a).     The  order   in   which   come   thb  periods    of  the 
several  planets    occupying  the  Kendra  or  the  Panaphara  or 
the  Apoklioa  houses  is  given  in  the  following  stanza. 

2.  The  lengths  of  the  several  planetary  periods  known 
as  dasas  are  the  same  as  those  of  tbe  planets  ns  found  iu 
the  last  chapter.  Again,  of  the  several  planets  occupying 
the  Kendra  or  Panaphara  or  Apoklina  houses,  the  dasa 
period  of  the  most  powerful  planet  cornea  first,  then  comes 
that  of  the  planet  next  in  power  and  so  on  ;  but  if  the 
planets  be  of  equal  power^  the  daisa  period  of  the  planet 
whose  period  is  the  longest  comes  first;  and  if  the  planets  be 
of  equal  power  and  period,  then  the  period  of  the  planet 
which  rises  firstCa)  comes  first. 

Notes. 

(a.)  That  is,  reappears  after  its  conjunction  with  the 
Sun  according  to  Commentator.  Taking  stanzns  1  and  2 
together,  we  find  that  the  dasa  period  of  either  Lagna  or  the 
Sun  or  the  Moon,  whichever  is  powerful,  comes  first.  Then 
come  the  periods  of  the  planets  occupying  the  Kendra  house  y 
in  the  order  stated.  Then  the  periods  of  the  planets  occupy- 
iug  the  Panaphara  houses   in  the   same   order,  and   lasts 


78  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [cH.   8 

those  of  the  phinets  occupying  the  Apoklina  houses  in  the 
same  order. 

8.  The  period  of  the  Antardasa(a)  (aub-division  of 
planetary  period)  of  the  planot'6)  occupying  the  same 
house  as  the  lord  of  the  dasa  period,  is  one-half  of  the 
antardasa  period  of  such  lord.  The  antardasa  period  of 
the  planet  occupying  the  5th>  or  the  9bh  house  from  the  lord 
of  the  dasa  period,  is  one-third>that  of  the  planet  occupying 
tlie  7th  house  from  the  lord  is  one-seventh^  and  that  of  the 
planet  occupying  the  M\  or  the  8  th  house  from  the  lord 
is  one- fourth  of  the  antardasa  period  of  the  lord.  The 
antardasa  periods  of  the  Lagnu-dasa  shall  be  determined  ia 
the  same  way. 

Notes. 

• 

(a).  Planetiuy  divisions  of  life  are  known  as  dasa 
periods  and  planetary  sub-divisions  of  life  are  known  asth& 
antardasa  periods. 

'  (h.)  The  antardasa  periods  of  a  particular  daua  period 
of  a  planet  come  in  the  order  stated  in  the  text,  namely 
first  comes  the  antardasa  period  of  the  planet  itself,  then 
that  of  the  planet  occupying  the  same  house  as  the  lord  of 
the  dasa  period,  then,  that  of  the  pUuiet  occupying  the  5th  or 
9th  house  from  the  lord,  then  that  of  the  planet  occupj'ing 
the  7th  house  from  the  lord,  and  lastly  that  of  the  planet 
occupying  the  4th  or  the  8th  house  from  such  lord.  If 
several    planets  occupy  the  same   house  as  the  lord  of  the 

dasa  period,  the  lord  of  the  antardasa  is  the  most  powerful 
of  them.  Similarly,  if  several  planets  occupy  the  5th  and  the 
9th  houses  or  the  7th  house  or  the  4th  and  8th  houses  from 
the  sign  occupied  by  the  lord  of  the  dasa,  the  lord  of  the 
antardasa  in  each  of  the  three  cases  is  the  most  powerful 
planet ;  so  that  the  several  antardasa  periods  are  in  the 
proportion    of    1  ^i  -i^ii   (vide  stanza  4.)  If  there  be- 


OH  .8]  BBIHAT   JATAKA.  79 

no  planets  in  any  of  these  places,  the  antardasa  periods  of 
the  other  planets  alone  should  be  taken. 

4.  The  fractions(a)  should  all  be  made  to  have  a 
common  denominator  with  different  numerators.  The 
dasa  period  should  be  divided  by  the  som  of  the  nnmera" 
tors  and  the  quotient  when  multiplied  by  the  several 
numerators  will  give  the  periods  of  the  several  antar- 
dasas. 

Notes, 
(a).     That  is  i,  {,  i,  :i  and  J. 

Suppose  for  instance  there  are   planets  in    the  severaj^ 
places  referred  to  in  the  last  stanza     excepting  say^  the  7th 
house    from   the  signi^  occupied  by   the  lord  of  the  dasa. 
.  The     periods    of    the  four  antardasas — those  of    (1)   the 
lord    of  the  dasa  ;  (2)  the  planet  with  it ;  (3)  the  planet 
occupying  the   5th  or  the     9th  house  from  it  and  (4)  the 
planet  occupying  the  4th  or   tho  8th  house  from  it — are  in 
the  proportion  of  }  :  i  :  J :  J.  Beduciug     these  to  fractions 
with  a  common  denominatori  we  get    ^| :  if  ^  it  and  ^;  in 
other  words  the  antardasa  periods  are  in  the  proportioh  of 
]^2  :  6  :  4  :  3.  The   sum  of  these  numbers  is  26  ;  if  therefore 
^he  dasa  period  be  divided   by  25  and  the  quotient  multi- 
plied by  12^  6^  4  and  S,  we     shall  obtain  the  periods  of  the 
four  antardasas^ 

0.  The  dasa  period(a)  of  the  most  powerf  nl  planefe 
ocupying  the  exaltation  degree  of  its  exaltation  sign  is  known 
11,8  8ampoorna^{b)  The  dasd  period  of  a  weak  planet  occupy- 
ing the  depression  degree  of  its  depression  sign  is  known  ag 
Bikta(c).  The  dasa  period  of  a  planet  occupyug  an 
j[nimical  Navamsa  and  also  the  depression  degree  of  its 
depression  sign  is  knowns   Anishta* 

Notes. 

(a).    As  well  as  the  antardasa  period  in  ;  this  and  in  tho 
next  tvro  oases  meatioaei  ia  tl^e  text.  ■  . ..  , 

11 


80  BR1HAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  8 

'  -  •  •     •  • 

(b).    The  dasa^period  of  a  planet  occuupying  simply  its 
exaltation  sign  and  not  very  powerful  is  known  as  Puma. 

(c)  The  dasa  period  of  a  weak  planet  occupying  simply 
its  depression  sign  is  also  known  as  Jtikta  (a,) 

6.  The  dasajperiod  of  a  planet  which  quitting  the  ex- 
altation degree  moves  towards  the  depression  sign  is  known  as 
Avarohini  ;  while  so  moving,  if  the  planet  occupy  a 
friendly  or  an  exaltation  Hayamsa  (6)  his  dasa  period  is 
knoYfan^Madhyama.  Again  thei  dasa  period  of  a  planet 
whioh  quitting  the  depression  degree  moves  towards  its 
exaltation  sign  is  known  as  Jrohini;  while.so  moving,  if 
the  planet  occupy  an  imimical  or  a  depression  Navamsa, 
his  dasa  period  is  known  as  Adhama, 

(a)-  As  well  as  the  antardasa  period  according  to  tho 
Commentator. 

.b).  Or  his  own  Navamsa  according  to  the  Commenta- 
toi*.  Exaltation  Navams^  is  one  which  bears  the  name  of 
the  exaltation  sign. 

7.  The  dasa  period  (a)  of  a  planet  which  occupies  a 
depression  or  an  inimical  Navamsa^  when  in  a  good  posi- 
tion(l))  is  known  as  Misraphala^^o).  The  several  names  of 
the  dasas  indicate  by  their  meaning  the  nature  of  the  das^ 
periods(i)«  We  shall  describe  (in  the  course  of  this  ohap- 
ter)(e)  the  effects  of  the  several  planetry  dasas. 

Notes. 

(a).    As  well  as   Che    antardasa  period  according  to 
Commentator. 

*  (b.)    That  isj  when  the  planet  occupies  his  own   house^ 
a  friendly   house  or  his  Moolatrikona  or  exaltation      house 


CH.  8.1  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  81 

(e).    Similarly  the  jdosa  period  of  a  planet  which  occu- 
pies an  inimical  or  depression   sign  and  is  in  bis  own  Na 
vamassj  in  a  friendly  Nayf^msa  or  a  Moolatrikona  or  exalta 
tion  Navamsa,  or  if  he  occupies  a  Vargotama  plaoej  is  also 
known  as  Misraphala, 

(d).  E*  g.  The  name  Sampurna  indicates  vast  pros- 
perlty.  Pooma  indicates  prosperity.  Adhama  indicates 
misery  or  destruction  and  very  little  prosperity.  lUkta 
indicates  misery  and  poverty.  And  Misraphala  indicates  a 
mixture  of  both  good  and  evil. 

(<?)•    From  stanza  12  of  this  chapter. 

8.  According  as  the  rising  Drekkana  is  the  firstj  se- 
cond or  thirds  the  Lagna  dasa  is .  known  as  Adhama^  Mad- 
hyama  or  XJttama  if  the  rising  sign  be  a  common  sign ;  TTtta- 
maj  Madhyama  or  Adhama  if  the  rising  sign  be  a  movable 
sign  ;  and  Adhama^  Uttama  or  Madhyama  if  the  rising  sign 

be  a  fixed  sign. 

Notes. 

In  other  words^  if  the  rising  sign  be  one  of  the  common 
signs^  Gemini^  Yirgo^.  Sagittw  and  Piscesi  the  Lagna  dasa 
is  known  as  Adhama,  if  the  rising:  Drekkan^  be  the  Ist^ 
Madhyania  if  itbe.tbe  2nd,  and  Uttama  or  Poojita  if  it  be 
the  3rd.  Againj  if  the  rising  sign  be  one  of  the  movable 
signs,  ALrieS)  Cancer^  Libra,  ai^4  Capricprn,  the  Lagua  dasa 
is  knoyrn  as  TJttama  if  the  risipg  Drekkana  be  the  1st,  Mad- 
hyama if  it  be  the  $nd|  and  Adhama  if  it  be  the  Srd.  Laetlyi 
if  the  rising  sign  be  one  of  the  fixed  signs,  Taurus,  Leo, 
Scorpio,  and  Aquarius,  the  Lagna  dasa  is  known  as  Adhama 
or  Asubha  if  the  rising  Ihekkana  be  the  first,  Uttama  or 
Ishth  if  it  be  the  2nd,  and  Madhyama  or  Sama  if  it  be  the 
8rd.  These  names  indicate,  as  already  stated,  the  nature  of 
the  dasa  period.  E.  g>  Adhama  indicates  misery,  Madhy- 
ama a  mixture  of  both  good  and  evil^  and  Uttama  indicates 
prosperity. 


89  9BIHAT  JATAKA.  [OH.  8' 

9.  The  Naisargika  (natural)  dasas  in  the  case  of  all* 
creatures  are  those  of  the  Moon,  Marsi  Meroory,  Yenns> 
Jupiter,  the  Sun  and  the  Saturn  in  the  order  stated^  and 
their  periods  are  respectively  1, 2>  9, 20^18, 20  &  SO  years(a)* 
If  the  Naisargika  dasa  period  and  the  ordinary  pla- 
netary dasa  period  happen  to  run  together*  such  period  (bp 
will  be  a  prosperous  one.  According  to  Yayaneswara^  the 
closiDg  period(c)  is  the  Naisargika  Lagna  dasa  and  pro- 
duces prosperity.    This  is  objected  to  by  some. 

Notes. 

(a).    In  all  120  years. 

(fi).    A  similar  remark  applies  to  the  Antardasa  periods 

(c).    The  period  of  life  after  120  years. 

1 0.  If  the  lord  of  the  dasa  period  or  one  of  his  friend*- 
ly  planets  occupy  the  Lagna(a)|  or  if  the  Lagna  belong  to 
the  Varga  (division)  (&)  of  the  lord  of  the  dasfi  period^  or  if 
n  benefio  planet  occupy  the  Lagna^  or  if  the  lord  of  the  dasa 
period  occupy  the  3rd>  6thj  lOth  or  11th  house  from  the 
Lagna,  such  dasa  peri6d(e)  will  be  a  prosperous  one  (d)  * 

Again^  if  the  Moon  that  occupies  (e)  a  sign  friendly  (/) 
to  the  lord  of  the  dasaC^)  or  the  exaltation  sign  of  the 
lord  of  the  dasa  or  the  Srd,  6th^  lOth,  Uth^  5th,  9th  or  the 
^  7th  house  {K)  from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  lord  of  the  dasa 
period,  she  will  bring  on  prosperity  j  otherwise(i)|  she  wiU 
produce  misery. 

Notes,  ; 

iqi).  Lagna :  This  is  interpreted  to  mean  the  rising 
sign  at  the  moment  of  the  commencement  of  the  dasa 
period ;  so  that  the  hour  of  commencement  of  a  dasa  period 
must  first  be  ascertained  and  a  figure  of  the  heavens  drawn 
up  for  the  hour. 


en.  8]  BRmAT  jataxa/  83 

(&)  •    Yarga :  If,  for  insiaDoe^  theLagna  be  the  sign^  Hora, 

Drekana^     Navamsa^    Dwadasamsa  or    Trimsamsa  of  the* 
lord  of  dasa  period.' 

(e).  Or  Antardasa  period  according  to  Commentator. 
({{)•  If  either  the  friendly  planet  or  the  benefic  planet 
ocoapying  the  Lagna  be  an  Atimitra  planet  to  the  lord  of 
theMosa  period^  such  period  will  be  a  very  prosperoaB  one ; 
if  such  benefic  planet  be  an  Atisatra]planetj  the  period  will 
not  be  a  prosperous  one ;  but  if  the  planet  be  a  neutral  one, 
just  the  effects  of  the  dasa  period  will  occur. 

(d).  According  to  the-Commentator^  the  Moon  causes 
prosperity  while  it  passes  through  •  the  several  places  men- 
tioned in  the  text.  These  places  are  with  reference  to  the 
signs  occupied  by  the  lords  of  the  dasa  and  antardasa  pe 
riods  in  the  course  of  their  motions  in  the  ecliptic. 

(/)•     Friendly  for  the  time  being. 

{g).    Or  antardasas  according  to  Commentator. 

(A).    Vide  note  (e). 

(t).  That  is  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  other 
places. 

1 1.    If  J  at  the  time  of  commencement  of  the  dasa  pe- 
riod of  a  planetj  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Cancer,  the  native 
will  become  rich>  live  in   comfort  and  become  a  man  of 
note  ;  ii,  at  the  time,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Aries  or  sign 
Soorpioi  his  .wife  will  become  unchaste;  if  the  Moon  occu-* 
py  either  sign  Gemini  or  sign  Virgo,  the  person  will  be- 
come more  learned,  get  more  friends  and  become  rich  ;  if 
the  Moon  occupy  sign  Leo,  the  person  will  live  in  dense 
and  impenetrable  forests ;  if  the  Moon  [occupy  sign  Taurus 
or  sign  Libra,  he  will  eat  sumptuous  meals  ;  if  she  occupy 
sign  Capricorn  or  sign  Aquarius,  he  will  get  a  bad  woman, 
and  if  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Sagittari  or  sign  Pisces,  the 
p  ersonwill  become  rich,  happy  and  respected. 


84  BBlHAT  JATAEA*  [OH.  8 

12.  Iq  the  benefic(a)  dasa  period(b)  of  the  San,  a 
person  will  acquire  wealth  by  dealing  in  perfumeSf  nailsi 
tasks  of  elephants  and  the  like  animals,  in  tiger  skin  and 
the  like^  in  gold,  by  means  of  roads,  by  the  king  and 
by  battle.  He  will  become  cruel,  oonrageons,  persevering, 
renowned  and  valorous.  In  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  the 
Son,  he  will  get  into  trouble  through  his  wife,  son,  money, 
enemy,  weapons,  fire  or  the  king,  and  he  will  become  liberal 
in  gifts  and  addicted  to  sinful  deeds;  he  will  quarrel  with 
his  servants  and  will  become  afflicted  in  mind  and  suffer 
from  chest  pain  and  the  like  diseases. 

Notes. 

(a).  The  technical  nanaes,  such  as  3ampuma,  Adhama, 
&C.,  given  to  the  planets  indicate  the  benefic  or  the  malefic 
character  of  their  dasa  period,  vide  note((2)  to  stanza  7. 

If  the  dasa  period  be  both    benefic  and  malefic^  the    na« 
tare  of  the  events  will  be  both  good  and  bad. 

(&)• .  Or  antardasa  period  according  to  Commentator. 

13.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  the  Moon,  the  per- 
son will  derive  benefits  by  dealing  in  or  by  means  of  the 
mantras,  the  Brahmins,  the  productions  of  sugar-cane,  milk> 
ghee,  and  the  like,  cloth,  flower,  plaj^,  sesamum  seed,  and 
foo^ ;  he  will  respect  virtuous  Brahmins  and  the  Devas  ;  he 
will  get  daughters  and  will  acquire  an  increase  of  wisdom, 
wealth  and  renown. 

.  In  the  malpfic  dasa  period  of  the  Moon,  the  person 
will  indulge  in  sleep  and  idleness,  will  lose  his  wisdom* 
wealth  and  renown  and  will  quarrel  with  powerful  men  and 
with  kinsmen. 

.  lit.  In  the  benefic  da^a  period  of  Mars  the  person  will 
fight  with  his  enemies,  will  f^cquire  wealth  through  bis 
brother!  the  king,  lands,  woollen  goods  and  goats. 


CH.  8  ]  BRIHAT  JkTAKk.  85 

Iq  the  molefio  dasa  period  of  Mars,  the  person  will 
hate  his  sons,  friends,  wife,  brothers,  learned  men  and  pre- 
ceptors ;  he  will  suffer  from  diseases  caused  by  or  conneot- 
^  with  thirsti  blood,  fever,  bile,  loss  of  limbs  or  sexiial  in- 
tercourse with  other  women.  He  will  associate  with  men 
doing  wicked  deeds;  he  will  become  vicious,  harsh  in 
speech  and  cruel. 

15.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  Mercury  the  person 
will  acquire  wealth  by  doing  acts  of  message  and  through 
friends,  preceptors  and  Brahmins.  He  will  attain  renown 
among  learned  men.  He  will  become  famous  and  will  get 
brass  and  the  like  mixed  metals,  gold,  horns,  Iands>  popu- 
larity, comfort  and  ease*  He  will  ridicule  others  and  will 
serve  under  other  men.  He  will  get  an  increase  of  wisdom 
and  successfully  do  deeds  of  virtue. 

In  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  Mercury  the  person  will 
become  harsh  in  bis  speech  and  will  suffer  from  grief,  im 
prisonment,pain  of  mind  and  diseases  arising  from  an  affec- 
tion of  the  three   dbatus — vata    (the  air),  pitta  (bile),  and 
sleshma  (phlegm.) 

16.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  Jupiter,  the  person 
will  acquire  wealth  by  acts  of  worship,  by  his  learning,  valor, 
ingenuity,  bright  personal  appearance,  military  fame,  man- 
tras, the  king  and  the  Yedas*  He  will  have  an  iocrease  of 
gold,  horses,  precious  stones  and  elephants  and  will  acquire 
the  friendship  of  good  kings. 

In  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  Jupiter,  the  person  will 
learn  things  requiring  much  ingenuity,  will  suffer  from  foo;^ 
journey  and  pain  in  the  ear  and  will  quarrel  with  wicked 
men. 

17.  In  the  benefic  daSa  period  of  Venus,  the  person 
will  enjoy  isweet  tnusic,  variou£t  pleasures,  perfumes,  sump- 
tuous meals,  alcohol^  fine  cloths,  women)    and   precious 


&6  BSIHAT  JATAKA.  .  [OH*  8. 

stones.  He  will  be  of  fine  appearance,  valorousi  and  will 
enjoy  every  sabstance,  provoking  sexual  passion^  will  be- 
come learned  in  the  Sastras,  will  obtain  tbe  object  of  bis 
desire,  will  acquire  friends,  will  become  skilled  in  trade  and 
in  agriculture,  and  will  get  bidden  treasures  and  wealtb. 

In  tbe  malefic  dasa  period  of  Venus^  tbe  person  will 
quarrel  with  crowds  of  people^  with  tbe  king,  banters  and 
wicked  men  and  be  will  suffer  much  from  bis  own  friends. 

18.  In  tbe  benefic  dasa  period  of  Saturn  the  person 
will  get  asses,  camels,  birds,  buffaloes  and  old  women>  will 
rule  over  hamlets,  villages  or  towns,  and  will  thereby  become 
renowned  and  will  get  grain  of  inferior  q^uality. 

In  tbe  malefio  dasa  period  of  Saturn  tbe  person  will 
suffer  from  phlegmatic  and  windy  complaints  ;  will  be 
jealous,  angryj  distracted  in  mind,  dirty,  exposed  to  danger, 
idle,  suffer  from  grief,  and  be  much  troubled.  His  servants^ 
sons,  daughters  and  wife  will  exercise  authority  over  him 
and  be  will  suffer  from  defective  organs. 

19.  If  tbe  dasa  period  be  a  benefic  one,  the  effects 
will  be  good  ;  if  it  be  a  malefio  one,  the  effects  will  be  bad, 
If  it  be  of  a  mixed  nature^  the  effects  will  be  both  good  and 
bad  j  the  effects  for  the  Lagoa  dasa  are  the  same  as  the 
effects  for  tbe  dasa  period  of  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign. 

Notes. 

As  stated  already,  the  character,  whether  benefic  or 
malefio  of  a  dasa  period  is  to  be  determined  from  tbe  |;echr 
nical  names  given  to  the  lord  of  tbe  period.  Vide  stanzas 
6  and  7.  Again,  if,  at  the  time  of  birth,  any  of  the  planets 
occupy  the  Upaohaya  houses>  be  of  bright  discs  and  of 
distinct  motion,  the  effects  will  be  good  in  their  dasa  pe- 
riods.   But  if  the  planets  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction,  ^ 


<?H.  8]  BBIHIT  JAtAKA.  b7 

of  disagreeable  appearance  or  of  si&all  discsj  the  efTeots  will 
be  bad  ia  their  dasa  periods.  The  planets,  which,  at  the 
time  of  commencement  of  their  an  tarda  sa  periods,  might 
be  aspected  by  benefic  planeta  or  occupy  the  Vargas  (divi- 
sioos)  of  benefic  or  atimitra  (very  friendly)  planets  are  power- 
ful and  will  not  cause  death  ;  if  they  be  situated  otherwise 
they  will  cause  death. 

20.  In  the  benefic  dasn periods  of  the  planets  a  person 
will  acquire  the  several  metals  assigned  to  the  planets  (vide 
Chapter  11.  12)  and  in  the  malefic  dasa  periods  of  the 
planets  he  will  lose  them.  iVgain,  in  the  antardasa  period 
of  a  planet  a  person's  occupation  will  be  that  mentioned 
for  the  planet  (vide  Chapter  X.)  The  efiects  described  for 
the  12  houses  from  the  ascendant,  for  the  12  signs  from 
Aries,  'for  planetary  aspects  and  for  all  yogas  ezcepling 
Nabhasa  yogas  (Gh.  12)  will  occur  in  the  dasa  period  of  the 
planet  which  is  most  powerful  among  the  yoga  planets. 

21.  In  the  dasa  period  of  a  particular  planet,  the 
person's  complexion  will  be  that  due  to  the  elementary 
principle  presided  over  by  the  planet  and  the  complexion 
will  be  accompanied  by  certain  other  qualities  due  to  the 
same  elementary  principles  and  discernible  by  their  res- 
pective organs  of  sense* 


Notes. 

Physical  man  is  a  composition  of  the  five  elementary 
principles— earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  ukas  (ether)  :  Mercury 
presides  over  earth;  Venus  and  the  Moon  over  water; 
Mars  and  the  Sun  over  fire  ;  Saturn  over  air  ;  and  Jupiter 
over  Akas.  In  the  dasa  period  of  a  particular  planet,  his 
elementary  principle  will  predominate  and  the  complexion 
of  the  person  during  such  period   will  be   that  due  to  the 

12 


88  BRiniT  JITAEA.  [OH.  8 

particular  elementeiy  principle.  Varaha  Mihira  in  Chapter 
68  of  his  Brlhat  Samhita  (Stanzas  90  ;;to  93)  has  thus 
stated  in   detail  the  complexion  due  to  each  of  the  seven 

.planets: 

^'  The  complexion  discernible  in  shining  teeth,  'skin, 
nails  and  hairs  of  the  body  and  of  the  head  will  be  attend- 
ed with  prosperity  ;  it  is  caused  by  the  element  of  earth  ; 
it  makes  the  person  happy,  rich  and  virtuous/' 

*'  The  complexion  which  is  glossy,  white,  clear^  green 
and  agreeable  to  look  at  is  caused  by  the  element  of  water  ; 
it  will  make  all  creatures  possessing  it  happy  and  successful 
in  all  their  attempts  and  will  produce  wealth,  comfort, 
luxury  and  prosperity." 

"  The  complexion  which  is  fearful,  unbearable,  of  the 
color  of  the  lotus,  gold  or  fire,  and  indicating  strength,  power 
and  valor,  is  caused   by  the  element  of  fire,  and  it  brings 

success  to  a  person  and   enables  him  to  gain  his  desired 

object." 

«'  The  complexion  which  is  dirty,  not  glossy,  black  and 

of  bad  sceut,  is  caused  by  the  element  of  air  ;  it  will  cause 

to  the  person  death  or  imprisonment,  disease,  ruin  and  loss 
of  wealth." 

*'  The  complexion  which  is  of  the  color  of  crystal, 
noble,  clenr  and  indicating  wealth  and  generosity,  is  caused 
by  the  element  of  ether ;  it  gives  a  person  all  that  he 
desires,*' 

Now  suppose  the  dasa  period  to  be  that  of  Mars,  his 
element  is  fire  ;  the  complexion  caused  by  the  elementary 
principle  of  fire  described  above,  will  be  the  complexion  of  a 
person  in  .  the  dasa  period  of  Mars  and  so  for  the  other 

planets. 

Again,  the  property   of  earth  is  smell,  discernible  by 
the  nose  ;  that  of  water  is  taste,  discernible  by  the   tongue 
that  of  fire  or  light  is  shape  or  appearance,   discernible  by 


CH*  8]  BRJHAT  JATAKA.  89 

the  eye  ;  that  of  air  is  toach>  disoetuible  by  the  body  ;  and 
that  of  Akas  is  sounds  discernible  by  the  ean  Suppose  the 
dasa  period  to  be  that  of  Yenusi  his  element  is  water  ;  the 
quality  belongiug  to  water  is  tflste^  discernible  by  the 
tongue.  Therefore  in  the  dasa  period  of  YenuSi  the  person 
will  eat  juiCsy  meals  according  to  his  desire.  In  the  dasa 
period  of  Jiipiber  (Akas — sound)>  the  person^s  speech  will  be 
sweet  and  agreeable  to  the  ear  ;  in  the  period  of  Mercury 
(earth — smell)^  the  person's  body  will  be  with  an  agreeable, 
odor  ;  in  that  of  Mars  (fire*— shape)  he  will  be  of  agreeable 
appearance;  and  in  that  of  Saturn(air: — touchi  he  will  be  of 
soft  body.  From  a  careful  observation  of  these  qnalifcies 
the  particular  dasa  period  of  a  person  may  also  be  deter 
mined. 

22.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  a  planet  the  good 
effects  are  caused  immediately  by  the  Divine  Soul  living 
within  the  body  and  assuming  for  the  time  being  a  bonefio 
character,  (a)  When  a  person  is  found  to  enjoy  the  good 
effects  described  for  a  planetary  dasa  period,  it  may  be 
concluded  that  such  dasa  period  is  going  on  at  the  time*  As 
regards  the  effects  described  for  planets  which  might  be 
powerless^  these  are  experienced  by  a  perison  either  in  his 
dream  or  in  mental  reveries. 

Notes. 

(a).  If  the  dasa  period  bo  a  malefic  one,  the  divine  soul 
assumes  a  malefic  character  for  the  time*  and  if  the  period 
be  of  a  mixed  nature^  the  divine  soul  assumes  a  correspond- 
ing character. 

(6).  A  wild  train  of  thought  in  which  a  person  enjoys 
o  r  suffers  according  to  his  hopes  or  fears. 

2.3.  If  the  character  o£  the  lord  of  a  dasa  period  be 
found  to  bebenefio  under  one  yoga  and  malefic  under  another 
yoga»  neither  of  the  effects  will  occur  ;  if  two  yogas  give  ^ 


90  BAIHAT  JATKA.  [cH.   8 

charaotor  and  one  another  character,  the  former  will  take 
effect.  But  if  to  two  distinct  planets  oonfllcting  effeota 
have  been  assigned^  both  will  come  to  pass. 


Notes. — The  division  of  life  into  dasas  as  given  by  the 
anthor  is  hardly  studied  by  Indian  astrologers,,  evidently 
from  the  difiicalties  attending  its  application.  These  astrolo- 
gersj  us  a  class,  employ  the  exceedingly  simple  division  of 
life  into  what  is  known  asUdu  or  Nakshatra  dasas.  According 
to  this  the  maximum  period  of  human  life  is  divided  into  9 
parts  presided  over  by  the  seven  planets  and  by  Itahu  and 
Eetu — the  two  nodes  of  the  Moon.  They  come  in  the  fol- 
lowing order  and  their  years  are  also  given  below  : 

(1)  The  Sun,       6  years.     (5)    Jupiter,   l6  years. 

(2)  Thp  Moon,  lO      „         («)     Saturn,  1 9    „ 

(3)  Mars,  7     „        (7)     Mercury,  17    „ 

(4)  Rahu,  18 :    „        (8)    Ketu,        7     „ 

(9)     Venus,  20  years. 

The  lord  of  the  dasa  period  at  the  time  of  birth  is  ascer* 
tained  from  the  asterism  which  the  Moon  occupies  at  the 
time — the  nine  triangular  asterisms  represent  the  nine 
dasas :  if  therefore  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy 
one  of  the  triangular  asterisms  of 

Krittika,U.  Phalguni  and  U.  Ashadha,  the  dasa  period 
is  that  of  the  Sun. 

Bohini,  Hasta  and  Sravana  •••   Moon. 

Mrigasirsha,  Chitra  and  Sravishta  • . .   Mars. 

Ardra,  Swati  and  Satabhishak  ...   Bahu. 

.  Punarvasu,  Visakha  and  P.  Bhadrapada  ...    Jupiter. 
Fushya,  Anuradha  and  U.  Bhadrapada     •..  Saturn. 
Aslesba,  Jyeshta  and  Bevati  ...  Mercury. 

Aswini,  Magha  and  Mala  ...  Ketu. 

Bharani,  P.  Phalguni  and  P.  Ashadha       ...  Venn?. 


6H.  8]  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  9t 

How  much  of  the  period  of  a  particular  dasa  bas  elapsed 
and  how  macli  remains  at  the  time  of  birth  mast  be  ascer- 
tained from  the  portion  of  the  asterism  passed  over  by  the 
Moon  and  the  portion  remaining  at  the  time.  This  may  be 
roughly  ascertained  from  the  time  taken  by  the  Moon  to  go 
over  the  portion  of  the  asterism — the  whole  time  in  which 
the  Moon  passes  through  a  particular  asterism  (as  given  in 
the  Calendar)  representing  the  full  period  of  a  dasa  ;  e.^* 
suppose  the  Moon  to  take  64  ghatikas  and  42  vighatikas 
to  go  over  the  asterism  of  Krittika^  and  suppose  that  at  the 
time  of  birth^  the  Moon  has  gone  over  a  portion  of  asterism 
covered  by  24  ghatikas  and  16  vighatikas.  Required  the 
number  of  years  remaining  at  the  time  of  birth  in  the  dasa 
period  of  the  Sun.  Now  the  time  in  which  the  Moon  will 
go  over  the  remaining  portion  of  the  asterism  of  Krittika== 
64  gh.  42.  vigh— 24  gh.  16  vigh.  =40  gh.  26  vigh.  Now  64 
gh.  and  42  vigh.  represent  the  whole  period  of  6  years  of  the 
Sun.  Therefore  time  required 


6  years 


64  gh»  42  vigh. 
6 


X40'gh.  26vigh. 


X40  X  60^+26. 


64  X  60  +  42 

6  6 


= X  2426  years  = Xff^  1213   years 

8892  1941 

7278 

=3 years  =  3  years,  8    months^  29  days, 

1941 

61  ghatikas,  89  vighatikas.     . 

To  this  must,  be  added  in  the  order  stated  the  dasa 
periods  of  the  Moon,  Mars,  Rahu,  &c.,  till  we  come  to  the 
present  age  of  the  person. 

Again,  the  nine  dasa  periods  are  each  divided  into  9 
sub-divisons  known  as  antardasas — the  lord    of  the  first 


D2  BRJHAT  JATAKA.  L^H.  9 

antardasa  being  tho  lord  of  the  dasa  period,  and  those 
of  the  antardasaa  which  follow  are  the  eame  as  the  lords 
of  the  dasa  periods  whioh  follow  ;  so  that  the  antardasasi 
of  the  dasa  period}  of  Jupiter  fur  instance  are  those  of  Jnpiter 
6atura>  Mei-oary>  Kelu,  Venus,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  Mars  and 
Bahu.  The  length  of  the  antardasa  periods  bear  the  same 
proportion  to  each  pother  as  the  lengths  of  the  dasa  periods. 
For  instance^  required  the  length  of  the  [antardasa  period 
of  Venus  in  the  dasa  period^of  Jupiter.  The  dasa  period  of 
Jupiter  is  16  years^  th(it  of  Venus  Is  20  years^  that  of  all  the 
planets  is  120  years  ;  therefore  the  length  of  the  antardasa 

16  years  8 

period  required  =  jg^aA  20  years  =  -  years=2years 

120  years  3 

and  8  xnontlis. 

Again^  eaoh  of  the  antardasa  period  is  further  sub- 
divided into  9  parts  in  the  same  proportion^  known  as 
Sukshma  periods.  The  appendix  will  contain  tables  for  the 
periods  of  the  dasa>  antardasa  and  sttkakoMk  periods — 
also  for  readily  ascertaining  by  mere  inspection  the 
period  from  one  dasa  period  to  another  and  from  one  antar- 
dasa period  to  another  antardasa  period. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

On  AsHTAKAyABaAs(a). 

].  The  benefic  places  of  the  Sun  are  the  Ist^  2nd| 
4th,  7th^  8thj  9lh  lOtli  and  llth  houses  from  himself  ;  the 
same  places  from  Mars  and  Saturn  ;  the  fifth,  7th  ^and  12th 
.iiouses  from  Venus;  the  5th^  6th,  9th  and  llth  houses 
from  Jupiter  ;  the  8rd,  6th,  lOth  and  llth  bouses  from 
the  Moon;  the  3rd,  5th,  6th,  9th,  10th,  llth,  and  12th 
houses  from  Mercury,  and  the  Srd,  4th,  6th ^  lOth^  llth  and 
12  th  houses  from  Lagna* 


CH.  9]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  93 

(a).  This  means  tlio  benelio  and  xnnlefio  places  of  a 
planet  \vith  reference  to  eight  places — the  places  occupied 
by   the  seven   planets  and  the  Lagna  at   the  time  of  birth. 

2.  The  benelio  places  of  the  Moon  are  the  8rd^  6th^ 
10th  and  11th  houses  from  Lagna  ;  the  2nd,  t^rd,  5tb,  6th, 
9th,  10th,  and  lUh  houses  from  Mars  ;  the  1st,  3rd,  6th, 
7th,  loth  and  11th  houses  from  herself  (Moon)  ;  the  Hrd^ 
6th,  7lh,  8th,  10th  and  IHh  houses  from  the  Sun  -,  the  3rdi 
5th,  Bth  and  11th  houses  from  Saturn  ;  the  Ist,  3rd,  4fcli, 
5th,  7th,  8th,  10th  and  11th  houses  from  Mercury  ;  the  1st, 
4th,  7th,  8th,  10th,  11th  and  12th  houses  from  Jupiter;  and 
the  3rd,  4th,  oth,  7th,  9bh,  10th  and  itth  houses  from 
Venus. 

8.  The  benefic  places  of  Mars  are  the  Srd,  5th,  6th 
lOth  and  11th  houses  from  the  Sun  ;  the  1st,  8rd,  6th  10th 
and  11th  houses  from  Lagna;  the  8rd,  6th,  and  1 1th  house^ 
from  the  Moon  ,-  the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  7th,  8th,  10th,  and  lUh 
houses  from  himself  (Mars);  the  1st,  4th,  7th,  8th,  9th,  lObh 
and  nth  houses  from  Saturn  ;the  8rd,  oth,  0th  and  11th 
houses  from  Mercury ^  the  6th,  8th,  11th  and  12th  houses 
from  Venus;  and  the  6th,  10th,  11th  and  12th  houses  from 
Jupiter. 

4.  The  benefic  places  of  Mercury  are  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd, 
4th,  5th,  8th,  9bh  and  llth    houses   from  Venus  ,*   the  fsb, 
2nd,  4th,  7th,  8th,  9th,  lObh  and  llth  houses   from    Saturn 
and  Mars ;  the  6th,  8th,  llth  and  12th  houses  from  Jupiter ; 
the  5th,  6th,  Oth,  llth  and  12th  houses  from  the  Sun;   the 
1st,  3rd,  5th,  6th,  €fth,   lOih  and  llth  houses  from  himself;  4^ 
the  2iid,  4th,  6th.^  10th  and   llth    houses  from  the  Moon;c/^ 
and  the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  6th,  8th,  10th,  and   llth  houses  from 
Lagna. 

5.  The  benefic  places  of  Jupiter  are  thei  1st,  2nd,  4th«< 
7th,  8th|  lObh  and  llth  houses  from  Mar^ ;  the  lstj2ud,  3rd 


A 


94  BRIHlT  JATAEA.  [OH.  9 

4th,  7th,  8th,  lOthand  11th  hoasea 'from  himself;  the  Tat,  2nd 
8rd,  4th,  7th,  8th^  9th,  10th  and  llth  houses  from  the  Sun  i 
the  2nd,  5th^  6th,  9th  lOthnndlUh  houses  from  Venus; 
the  2nd>  5th,  7tli,  9th  and  llth  houses  from  the  Moon  ;  the 
8rd*  5th, 6th  and  12th  houses  from  Saturn;  the  Ist^  2nd,4th^ 
5th,  6th,  9th,  10th,  and  llth  houses  from  Mercury,  and  the 
1st,  2nd,  4th,  5th,  6th,  7th,  Oth^Oth  and  llth  houses  from 
Lagnn.  *^ 

6.  The  bonefio  places  of  Venus  are   the  Ist^  2nd,   8rd, 
.     .  4th,  5th,  8th,  9th  and  lUh  houses  from  Lagna ;  the  Ist,  2nd, 

q\l2  *  3id,  4th,  Sth^llth  and  12th  houses  from  the  Moon  ;the  1st, 
2nd,  8rd,  4th,  5th,  8th,  9th,  lOth  and  1 1  th  houses  from  him- 
self ;  the  3rd,  4th,  5th,  8th,  9th,  lOth  and  llth  houses  from 
Saturn;  the  8th,  llth  and  12th  houses  from  the  Sun  ;  the 
5th|8th,  0th,  lOthand  llth  houses  from  Jupiter;  the  3rd, 
5th,  6th,  9th  and  llth  houses  from  Mercury  ;  and  the  3rd;, 
5th,  6th,  9th,  llth  and  12th  houses  from  Mars. 

7.  The  benefio  places  of  Saturn  are  the  3rd,  5th,  6th 
and  llth  houses  from  himself;  the  8rd,  5th,  6th,  lOth,  llth 
and  12th  housea  from  Mars  ;  the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  7th,  8th,  lOth 
and  llth  houses  from  the  Sun;  the  lst,3rd,  4th,  6th,  10th 
and  llth  houses  from  Lagna  ;  the  6th,  8th,  9th,  10th,  lltli 
and  12th  houses  from  Mercury  ;  the3rd,6th,  and  llth  housea 
from  the  Moon  ;  the  6th,  llth  and  the  12th  houses fromVenus; 
and  the  5th,  6th,  llth  and  12th  houses  from  Jupiter. 

8.  Thus  have  been  described  the  benefic  places  of 
the  planets  ;  the  other  places  are  malefio.(a)  A  place  will 
produce  benefic  or  maleiio  effects  if  it  be  more  benefic  for 
the  planet   than  malefic  or  vice  versa(&). 

These  places  are  all  with  reference  to  the  places  occupi- 
ed by  the  planets  at  the  time  of  birth.  The  planets  while 
passing  through  places  which  happen  to  be  the  Upachaya 
houses  or  which  might  be  their  own  housea  or  their  friendly 


OH.  9] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


$5 


or  exaltation  signSi  produce  bcnefic  efTects  fully  if  suoh 
IiouBes  or  signs  are  more  Leiiefio  for  the  planets  than 
malefic  ;  and  planets  while  passiug  through  places  which 
happen  to  be  Apachnya  houses  or  which  might  be  their 
inimical  or  depression  signs^  produce  malefic  effects  fully  if 
such  houses  or  signs  be  more  malefic  for  the  planets  than 
benefic. 

Notes. 

(a).  For  instance^  the  crd>  51h,  6th  and  1 2th  houses 
from  himself  are  malefic  places  for  the  Sun.  The  Ist,  2nd, 
4th>  5th,  7thf  8th>  9th,  and  I2th  houses  from  Lagna  are 
malefic  places  for  the  Moon,  and  so  forth. 

(h).  In  preparing  tables  of  Ashtakavargs>  it  isnsual 
to  mark  the  benefic  places  with  dots  and  the  malefic  place^ 
with  lines.  We  will  put  dowu  the  Ashtakavarga  table  for 
Mars  in  the  following  horoscope  :— 


1 

Lngna. 
Venus. 

• 

Sun. 

• 

Moon. 
Mercury. 

■'                                    4          ' 

llasi  Chakra. 

Jnpitor. 

• 

Mars. 

• 

■ 

Saturn. 

• 

Mark  the  benefic  places;  of  Mars  with  dots  and  (ho 
malefic  places,  with  lines.  The  result  will  be  found  to  be 
as  follows. 

13 


96 


BBIHAT   JATAEA. 


[oh.  9 


000  =5  3 

mil  =  5 

000   =  8 

mil  =5 

000  =  3 
lllll  =^  5 

000    =  3 

mil  =  5 

00)  =  8 

mil  =  5 

Ashtaka  Varga  of  Mars. 

0000  =  4 

nil  =  4 

00000  =  5 
111  =  3 

00000  n  5 
111  =  8 

00  =  2 
1UU1=  6 

0=  1 
lllllll  =  7 

00000  ?=  5 
111  =  8 

00  =?  9 
111111=  Q 

The  table  means  tbi^t  while  Mars  moves  tbrongli  sign 
Aries  for  insta^oej  tbe  benefio  effects  will  be  f  and  tbo 
maleOc  effects  will  be  |,  In  otber  words  he  prodacea 
malefic  effects  to  the  extent  of  | — J-  or  f  of  his  power* 
Similar  remarks  apply  to  the  otber  places. 

Notes. — The  Aahataka varga  tables  are  generally  pre^ 
pared  with  the  nnmbex"  of  beneBo  dots  alone  marked  in  them 
-—the  number  representing  the  maleBq  lines  being  the 
difference  between  uumber  8  and  the  number  of  dots^  The 
above  table  will  then  stand  as  follows  : — 


3. 

4. 

5. 

• 

s, 

2. 

I. 

6. 

8. 

AU  these  numbers  represent  the  benefic  dotj^ 


t^.  dj  BRIHAT  llTAkA.  1)7 

l?he  A.V.  tabids  lire  tksefdl  in  the  pi^ediction  o{  most 
ot  the  importiitit  events  of  lite.  Regular  treatises  exist  on 
this  branch  of  horosoop7>  which  ihnsb  be  consulted  for 
fbll  parti()uiars&  We  shall  give  here  some  of  the  uses  of 
the  A^  y*  tablosi 

l^he  tables  prepared)  as  stated  abdve>  with  figuifes  re- 
ptesentinfi^  benefit  dots  lire  subjected  to  two  reductions  or 
eliminations^  known  as  Trikona  fekhd  Ekadhipattya  reduc-* 
tious — that  is,  of  the  figures  in  the  triangular  signs,  and  of 
the  figures  in  the  several  pairs  of  signs  forming  the  houses 
of  the  planets  from  Mars  to  Saturn* 

I. 

T&tKOltA  OB  l^filANQULAB   BeDUOTIONS. 

The  Triangular  signs  are  given  in  the  noted  to  Stanssa 
6  of  Chapter  t.    The  reduction  rules  are : — 

1.  If  the  figures  in  the  triangular  signs  be  not  all  alike 
subtract  from  each  the  least  of  the  three  figures,  keeping 
the  remain  ders. 

3.  If  there  be  no  figure    in  one  of  thelthree  signsi  no 

reduction  need  be  made. 

8.  It  there  be  no  figure  in  two  of  the  three  signs 
remoye  the  figure  in  the  third. 

4.  If  the  figures  in  the  three  signs  be  equal,  remoye 
them  all. 

II. 

EkadhipAttta  Beduotions. 
The    Ekadhipattja   signs  are   given    in   the  notes  to 
Stanza  6^of  Chapter  t.    The  reduction  rules  are  : — 

1 .  If  there  be  planets  in  both  the  houses  of  a  planet 
no  reduction  need  be  made. 

2.  Of  the  two    houses  of  a  planet,   one  of  which  is 
occupied  and  the  other  not,  {\)  i{  the  figure  in  the  former 


93  BBIITAT  JATAKA^  [OH.  9 

be  smaller  than  ibo  figure  in  the  lalter^  make  the  latter 
equal  to  the  former,  (2)  if  the  figure  in  the  former  be 
greater  than  the  figure  in  the  latter^  remove  the  latter,  (8)| 
if  the  figures  ill  :both  be  equal,  remove  the|  6gure  in 
the  latter. 

3.  Of  the  two  houses  of  a  planet,  both{of  which  are 
not  occupied,  (a),  if  the  figures  in  the  two  houses  be  equal 
remove  both  ;  (b),  if  the  figures  be  unequal,  make  the  larger 
figure  equal  to  the  smaller  one. 

4.  If  there  be  no  figure  in  one  of  the  two  houses  no 
reduction  need  be  made. 

5.  The  figures  in' the  signs  Cancer'landiLoo,  which  are 
respectively  the  houses  of  the  Moon  and  the  Sun,  are  not 
subject  to  the  Ekadhipatt3^a  reductipn. 

Illdstration. 

•  . 

We  will  apply  these  rules  to  the  A*  V.  table  of  Mars 
given  already. 

Rbduction  T. 

The  figures  iu  the  Triangular  signs  of  ArieS)  Leo  and 
Saggittari  are  respectively  3>  5,  2.  Under  rule  (1)  subtract 
2  from  each,  and  the  resulting  figujes  are  1,  3,  0.  The 
figures  in  the  triangular  signs  of  Taurus,  Virgo  and  Oapri- 
oorn,  are  respectively  8,  2,  5.  Applying  rule  (I)  we  get 
J,  0,  3.  The  figures  in  the  triangular  signs  of  Gemini, 
Libra  and  Aquaries  are  3,  5,  3.  Applying  rule  (1)  we  get 
0,  2,  0.  The  figures  in  the  triangular  signs  of  Cancer,  Scor- 
pio and  Pisces  are  4,  1,  3.  Applying  rule  (1)  we  get  8,  0,'2. 
So  that  the  A.  V.  of  Mars  after  the  first  reduction  stands  as 
.  follows* 


Cbi.  9. j 


BBIHAT  JATAKA« 


99 


■ 

1 

\ 

2 

1 

1 

0 

0 

3 

A.  V.  of  Marn  nfter  RedacfcioD 
No.  I. 

3 

3 

0 

0 

2 

0 

EtoucndN.  No.  II* 


This  reductida  should  be  made  only  to  the  figures  re- 
sultiDg  from  Reduction  No*  L 


Of  Aries  And  Scorpio,  the  two  houses  of  Mars,  Aries 
is  occupied  and  Scorpio  is  unoccupied*  The  figures  in  them 
are  1,  and  Oj  respectively.  Under  rule  (4)  no  reduction  need 
'be  made.  Taurus  and  Libra^  the  two  houses  of  Venus,  are 
both  occapied;  under  rule  (1)  no  teduction  need  be  mada. 
Gemini  and  Virgo,  the  two  houses  of  Mercury  are  both 
unoccupied,  the  figures  in  them  are^  o  and  o-Rule  (4)  applies 
and  there  is  no  necessity  for  reduction*  Of  Pisces  and 
Sagittari)  the  two  houses  of  Jupiter,  the  former  alone 
.is  occupied  and  the  figures  in  them  are  2  and  o.  Under 
rule  (4)  no  reduction  need  be  made.  Of  Aquarius  and  Cap- 
ricorn  the  two  houses  of  Saturn  the  latter  alone  is  ocou-* 
pied  and  the  figures  in  them  are  o,  and  3.  Applying  rule 
4  no  reduction  need  be  made*  The  figures  in  Cancer  and 
Leo,  which  are  respectively  the  houses  of  the  Moon  andthe 
Sun,  are  not  subject  to  reduoliou  Vide  rule  5*  These  figures 
are  3  and  3. 

So  that  after  Reduction  No.  II  tl"   ' .  V.  table  of  Mars 
will  stand  thus  :-— 


100 


fiBIHAT  ikTktkl 


IcAi  d. 


A.  V.  fable  of  Mars 'after  Reduc- 
iioDa  I  atid  It. 


8 


8 


8 


The  total  of  ligares  after  the  2  reductions  is  15. 
Similarly   the   A*   Y.   tabled  of  the   Sun,  the  Moon^ 
Mercury,   Jupiter,  Venus  and  E^aturn  may  bo  reduced. 
We  will  now  gi^e  some  of  the  uses  of  these  tables* 

A.  V.  of  the  Sun. 

In  the  case  of  A.  Y.  of  the  Sun,(a)  multiply  the  total 
of  the  figures  after  reductions  by  the  figure  in  the  9th  house 
from  the  Sun  in  the  A.  Y.  Divide  the  product  by  27  and 
take  the  remainder.  Mark  the  asterism^  counting  the  re« 
mainder  from  Aswini.  When  Saturn 'passes  through  such 
asterism  or  through  its  triangular  asterisms  either  a  person's 
father  or  paternal  uncle  will  die  or  suffer  miseries  if  the 
planetary  dasa  period  at  the  time  be  a  malefic  one. 

No  work  shall  be  commenced  when  the  Sun  passes 
through  signs  where  there  are  no  figures  in  A.Y.  of  the  Sun* 

During  such  periods  a  person  suffers  from  diseases, 
misery  and  quarrel. 

Multiply  the  total  of  reduced  figures  by  the  figures 
in  the  8th  house  from  the  Sun  in  the  A.  Y*  of  the 
Sun.  Divide  the  product  by  12.  The  remainder  represents 
the  sign  (month)  from  Aries,  through  which  or  through  one 
of  its  triangular  signs  when  the  Sun  passes  a  person  dies  (in 
the  year  of  his  death). 

(a)  A.  Y.  of  a  planet  is  tho  Aahtaka  Yarga  of  a  planet  before  redaction 


ta.  d.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  101 

Add  together  the  three  figures  in  each  of  the  4  sets  of 
the  triangalar  signs  Arie8,Le0j  Sagittari,  &o.  Fiud  out  which 
of  these  totals  is  the  largest.  Fiud  out  the  Dik  or  quarter 
for  the^particnlar  set  of  triangular  signs  giving  the  total. 
(Vide  note  (/)  to  stanza  19  Chapter  II).  The  place  of  wor* 
ship  in  the  hbnse  of  a'person  will  be  in  such  direction. 

A*  V.  of  the  Moon. 

Multiply  the  total  of  the  reduced  figures  by  the  figure 
in  the  4th  house  from  the  Moou  in  A.  Y  of  the  Moon  ;  divide 
the  product  by  27>  take  the  remainder  and  for  it  find  out  the 
asterism  from'^^Aswici  as  before.  Wlien  Saturn  passes 
through  such  asterism  or  through  its  triangular  asterisms 
a  person's  mother  dies  or  suffers  miseries  if  the  planetary 
dasa  period  at  the  time  be  a  malefic  one. 

Multiply  the  total  of  reduced  figures  by  the  flgitre  in 
the  8th  house  from  the  Moon  in  the  A.  Y.  of  the  Moon. 
Divide  the  product  by  27-  Take  the  remainder;  and  for  it 
find  out  the  asterism  from  Aswiui  as  before.  When  the 
JMoon  passes  through  it  or[,tlirough  its  triangular  asterisms 
there  will  be  quarrel^  anger  and^^grief. 

No  work  shall  be  commenced  when^the  Moon  passes 
through  signs  in  which"there^are  no  figures  in  the  A.  Y.  of 
the  Moon. 

Fiud  out^the  Dik  or  quarter  as  before  and  it  will  give 
the  position^of  thejbath-room  in  the  house  of^a*  person. 

A.  Y.  of  Mars. 

When  Saturn  passes  through  signs  in  which  there  aro 
no  figures  in  the  A.Y.  of  Mars,4he  person  will  sufEer  from 
diseases>*if  Mars  be  powerful,  and  will  die  if  Mars  be  weak 
and  if  he  be  not  the  lord  of  the  ascendant. 


102  BrJHAT  JATAKA.  '[c^.  9 

Find  ont  tlie  Dik  or  quarter  as  before. 

lb  will  give  tlie  position  of  the  kitchea  ia  a  peraon'ti 
house, 

A.  V.  of  Mercury. 

When  Siiturn  passes  through  signs  in  whioh  there  are  no 
fi^^ures  in  the  A.Y.  of  Meroury  the  person's  son  or  friends 
will  die. 

Find  out  the  Dik  or  quarter  as  before* 
It    will  give  the  position  of  the  play^^ground  in  the 
house  of  a  person. 

A.  V.  of  Jupiter. 

The  figure  in  the  5th  house  from  Jupiter  in  the  A.V.  of 
Jupiter  will  give  the  number  ot  sons  of  a  person.  The  nnm« 
ber  of  those  meeting  with  early  death  will  be  the  number  of 
phmois  oconp}'ing  inimical  or  deprossion  signs. 

The  Dik  or  quarter  ascertained  as  before  will  give  the 
position  of  the  Treasury  or  store-room, 

A.  V.  of  Venus. 

A  person  will  get  a  wife,  lands  and  wealth  when  Venus 
passes  tlirouo^h  signs  oontaining  the  largest  figure  in  the  A. 
V.  of  Venus  after  reduction^ 

The  Dik  or  quarter  ascertained  as  before  will  give  the 
position  of  the  bed  room. 

A.  V.  of  Saturn. 

In  the  A.  V.  of  Saturn  add  together  the  figures  in  the 
signs  from  the  ascendant  tii  the  house  occupied  by  Saturn 
and  also  figures  in  the  signs  from  Saturn  to  the  ascendant. 
The  two  totals  will  give  the  years  in  which  a  person  will 
suffer  from  diseases  and  from  grief.  Add  the  two  totals  the 
sum  will  give  the  year  iu  which  a  persou'd  lifo  will  bo  ia 
danger. 

A  similur  remark  applies  to  the  A.  V.  of  Murs. 


til.  d.]  BBJHAt  JATAKA.  lOSt 

« 

When  the  San  and  the  Moon  pass  through  signs  in 
inrhioh  the  figures  are  le&st  in  tlie  A.  V.  of  Saturn)  a  person 
dies  (iu  his  yeai^  of  death). 

The  i)ik  or  quarter  ascertained  as  beforo  gives  the 
position  of  the  spot  where  the  sweepings  are  gathered. 

Barvashtaica  Varga 

The  Ashtaka  vai*gas  of  the  Sun  and  other  planets  con- 
sidered separately  are  known  as  Bhiniiashtaka  vargfas  and 
their  sum  forms  what  is  known  aA  Sarvashtaka  varga.  In 
the  latter,  the  figure  in  sigh  Aries  is  the  sura  of  the  figured 
in  sign  Aries  in  the  several  Bhinnasbtaka  vargas;  similarly 
the  figure  in  sigb  Taurus^of  S*  A.  V.  is  the  sum  of  the 
figures  in  sign  Tauriis  of  the!  B*  A.  Vs.  and  the  figures 
of  the  other  signs  may  be  similarly  obtained.  The  total  of 
these  figures  will  always  be  837 — this  being  the  sum  of  the 
totals  of  the  figtired  of  the  seven  Bj  A.  Vs.  The  latter  figures 
are  48^  49,  89^  54,  56,  63  and  89  from  Sun  to  Saturn. 

Kow  various  events  of  life  are  predicted  by  means  of  the 
figures  of  the  S.  A.Y^  table* 

(1).  If  the  figure  in  a  particular  sign  exceed  30  then 
planets  passing  through  it  will  produce  bonefic  effects  j  if  it 
be  between  25  and  30,  such  eflfects  will  be  neither  good  noi* 
bad  aud  iE  the  figure  be  less  than  25  the'effects  will  be  bad. 

Again,  all  good  works  shall  be  commenced  when  the 
rising  sign  is  one  whose  figure  is  largest  in  the  S.  A.  V^ 
table  aud  marriages  and  other  connections  shall  be  formed 
with  persons  whoso  star  is  one  of  the  stars  of  such  sign. 

(2).  As  the  10th  house  represents  labour,  the  11th 
house  gain  and  the  12th  loss>  if  the  figure  in  the  11th  house 
be  greater  than  the  figure  in  the  lOth  house  and  if  the  figure 
in  the  12th  hoube  be  smaller  than  the  figure  in  the  11th  house 
and  if  the  figure  in  the  ascendant  be  greater  than  the  figure 

U 


104  IRIHAT  JATAXA.  [€0.   S^ 

iu  the  12tli  hoase  tlie  person  will  be  happy  and  prosperous — 
the  meaning  is  clear,  the  labor  bein^  sligKfc^  gain  much  and 
loss  companitively  small.  If  the  figures  be  otherwise  the 
person  will  be  unhappy. 

(3).  Excepting  the  0th,  8th  and  l2th  houses,  of  the 
remaining  9  houses  the  significations  of  those  wheria  thct 
figures  are  large  will  be  in  a  condition  of  prospeiity  {Vide 
note  (a)  to  Stanzi  15,  Chapter  I.) 

(4.)  Add  together  the  figures  of  the  four  signs  fron» 
Pisces, — Pieces,  Aries,  I'aurus  and  Gemini.  Add  also  the 
figures  of  the  four  signs  from  Cancer  and  of  the  four  signs* 
from  Scorpio.  These  three  totals  represent  the  three 
sections  of  a  man's  life.  Whichever  total  is  the  largest, 
the  coiTOsponding  division  of  life  will  ba  happy  and  pros- 
perous. If  three  or  more  malefic  planeta  occupy  the  four 
signs  from  Pisces  a  person  will  suffer  miseries  in  the  1st 
section  of  life  ;  if  they  occupy  the  four  signs  from  Cancer 
the  miseries  will  occur  in  the  2nd  section,  and  if  they 
occupy  the  four  signs  from  Scorpio,  then,  in  the  3rd  section 
of  life.  If  the  planets  in  the  several  sections  be  benefio  the 
person  will  be  happy ;  and  it  both  malefic  and  benefio  pla- 
nets  occupy  the  several  sections  the  efl^ects  will  be  both 
good  and  bad. 

r»  Add  together  the  figures  in  the  houses  occupied  by 
Saturn,  Lagna  and  Mars.  The  sum  will  give  the  year  in 
which  a  person  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  other  miseries. 

G*  Add  together  the  figures  of  houses  occupied  by 
It>ihu,^  Mars  and  Saturn,  The  sum  will  give  the  year  in 
which  a  person  will  suffer  from  poison,  weapons  and 
wounds. 

7.  Add  together  the  figures  of  the  signs  ocQ^pied  by 
benefio  planets.  The  sum  will  give  the  year  in  which  a 
poriou  will  get  a  sou#  wealth  and  the   like. 


€H.   9.]  BRIHAT  jATJLKA.  105 

8.  Multiply  the  total  of  the  figures  of  A.  Y.  of  iho 
planet  who  is  the  lord  of  the  Sth  house  from  the- Ascendant 
by  the  fignre  of  the  8th  house  in  S.  A.  Y.  table.  Divide 
the  product  by  12 ;  the  temainder  will  give  the  Month  from 
Aries  in  which  a  person  dies  (in  the  year  of  his  death.) 

In  the  same  way  the  month  of  death  oE  a  p.erson*A 
father  may  be  ascertained  by  u  similar  calculation  with 
reference  to  the  9th  honse  and  that  of  the  mother  with 
reference  to  the  4th  honse. 

« 

9'  Find  out  from  the  S.  A.  Y.  table  the  powerFul  Dik 
or  quarter.  Oow  sheds,  rice  (ields,  ngricuUurnl  opemtions 
shall  be  conducted  io  such  dik  or  quarter  and  the  weak  dik 
or  quarter  shall  be  rejected  Tor  all  purposes. 

Again,  Parasara  in  his  Hora  Sastra,  a  very  roltt- 
minous  work,  has  treated  of  32  distinct  processes  for  ascer- 
taining the  length  of  human  life*     They  are  : 

L  Pindayurdaya          ...         ...         ..,  12 

II.  Diirbyaynrdayai        ...        .^«         •••  4 

III.     Basmikayurdaya ,,,  4 

lY.    Amsakayurdaja       ...  4 

Y.     AshtakavHi'gaynrdaya           4 

lY.    Yishayayurdaya        ,^         2 

YII*     Nakshatramsakayurdnya      2 

Total      S2 
J.  Pindayurdaya. 

This  is  divided  into  3  schools,  (1)  that  of  Tavanaoharya 
(vide  Stanza  1  Gh.  7)>  (2)  that  of  Jeeyasarma  (vide  stsCnza 
9  (Jh«  73|  (8)  that  of  Badnrayana  according  to  which  the 
maximum  years  ofeaoh  planet  when  in  his  exaltation  sign 
is  one-seventh  of  100  }*eaTs. 

Enoh  of  thef^e  three  schools  hns  4  sub-diviBions :  (a) 
The    Neechsrdhharana   process  accofjing   to     which    the 


]06  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [gH.    9,- 

maximum  period  is  one-half  at  depression,  (b)  The  Neecha- 
bhava  process  according  to  which  the  period  vanishea 
at  depression,  (o)  The  Krita  harana  process  according  to 
which  the  periods  suffer  reductions,  {d)  The  Akrita  harana 
process  according  to  which  the  periods  puffer  nojeduotions. 
Thus  Pindayurdaya  is  of  18  sorts. 

JL  Dhruvayurdaya. 

This  is   otherwise  known  as  Nysargikayurdaya.   (vide 
Stanza  ^9  Ch.  8).     As  stated  above  there  are  4  kinds  of  this : 
depending  on  the  4  divisions  mentioned  above — (a),  (6),  (c) 
and  ((f). 

IIL  Rasmihayurdaya. 

According  to  this  the  years  of  the  planets  from  the 
Sun  to  Saturn  are  respectively  16,  20^  9^8^  9,  25,  and  26i 
There  are  4  kinds  of  this  as  stated  above. 

JV  Awsakayurdaya. 

This  is  Satyacharyar's  method  referred  to  at  the  end 
of  stanza  9  Gh.  7,  This  process,  in  certain  cases  has  to  be 
varied  into  what  is  known  as  Frakramanugata  method. 
The  two  processes  again  divide,  eaoh^  into  two  parts  known 
as  Kritavridhika  and  Akritavridhika — f  e,  the  years  are  to 
be  increased  according  to  some  and  not  to  bp  increased 
according  to  others,  Vide  Faraeiara's  Hpra  Sastra.  ^h^xH 
we  get  4  kinds  of  Amsakayurdaj^a. 

F.  ^ahtakavargayurdaya' 

This  process  as  stated  above  has  to  be  varied  into 
what  is  known  as  Frakramanugata  method.  The  two  pro-* 
cesses  again  divide,  each>  into  two  parts  known  as  Krita*' 
vridhi  and  Akritavridhi  as  stated  above,  Viile  Parasara 
Hora.  Thus  we  get  4  kinds  of  AshCakavargayurdaya.  Ohq 
of  these  4  methods  is  given  at  the  end  of  these  notesi, 


CB.  9.] 


BR7HAT  JATAKA. 


107 


VL  VisJuxyayufdaya. 

This  consists  of  two  kinds-r-the  one  according  to  Pnra- 

sara  and  the  other  as  mentioned  in  a  work  named  Prakri* 

yamala.    These  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  Ahhtakayarga 

prooesSf 

FIT.  NaJeshatramsaJcayurdaya' 

This  is  of  two  kinds — the  one  is  known  as  the  Eala* 
chakra  process  and  the  other  as  the  Nakshtradasa. 

Thas  82  processes  are  mentioned  by  Parasara  who  at 
the  same  time  states  the  partioalar  cases  to  which  each 
procees  is  applicable.  Of  these  32  processes,  Yaraha  Mihira 
has  mentioned  the  most  important  ones  in  chapter  7.  For 
farther  particnlars  in  Aynrdaya  the  reader  is  referred  to 
the  works  of  Parasara  and  other  writers. 

We  shall  here  state  the  details  of  the  Ashtakavarga 
process*    The  following  tables  are  employed  in  the  process, 

Basi  Gnnakara  or  Zpdiaoal  factors. 


Aries 

•o      7 

Libra 

7 

Taurus 

...     30 

Scorpio 

...        8 

Gemini 

...       8 

Sagittari 

...        9 

Cancer 

...       4 

Capricorn 

5 

Leo 

...     10 

Aquarins 

...      11 

Virgo 

...       6 

Pisces 

...       12 

Graha  Gunakara  oi 

r  Planetary  factors 

The  Sun 

•  ••     5 

Mercury 

•<•       5 

The  Moon 

ff.     5 

Jupiter 

...    10' 

M-irs 

•;.    8, 

Venus 

-     7 

SATURN.  5. 

Multiply  the  several  figures  in  the  signs  from  /Vries  in 
the  Ashtakavarga  of  the  Sun  by  the  figures  of  the  Basi 
Gunakara  table  respectively  and  add  the  products* 

Again  multiply  the  several  figures  in  the  signs  occu« 
piod  by  the  Sun  and  other  planets  by  the  figures^  of .  the 


103  BRIHAT  JATAKA..  [CH.    9. 

jQraba  Gmmkara  table  Tespectiyely  and  add  the  prodaots. 
Add  the  two  total^.  Multiply  the  sum  by  7;  divide  the 
podact  by  27.  Tlie  quotient  will  give  the  years  of  the  Sun. 
Jiiuliifily  the  remainder  by  12  and  divide  the  product  by  27 
the  quotient  will  give  the  months  ;  multiply  the  remainder 
by  80  and  divide  the  product  b)*  27  ;  the  quotient  will  give 
the  days^  and  similarly  find  the  Ghatikas  and  Yighatikas* 
Thus  we  have  obtained  the  A.  Y.  years  of  the  Sun, 

Similarly  those  of  the  Moon,  Mars^  Mercury,  Japiter, 
Venus  and  Saturn  may  be  obtained  from  the  A.  Y.  tables. 

Now  these  periods  are  subjec^  to  the  following  reduc- 
tions* 

(1.)  If  a  planet  is  accompanied  by  another  planet  in 
a  sign  the  amount  of  reduction  is  one-half  of  the  period 
obtained. 

(2.)  If  a  planet  occupy  his  depression  sign,  the 
amount  of  reduction  is  one-half. 

(3.)  If  he  be  an  Astangata  planet^  the  amount  of  re- 
duction is  also  one-half. 

(4.)  If  he  occupy  an  inimical  sign>  the  amount  is  one-* 
third. 

(5.)  If  he  occupy  the  visible  hemisphere  the  amount 
is  one-half. 

((>.)  If  be  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction  the  amount  is 
one-third. 

(7)  In  the  case  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  again,  if 
these  bo  of  unusual  appearance  the  amount  is  one-third. 

M  B,  Where  several  reductions  have  to  be  applied  to 
the  period  of  a  planet  it  will  be  enough  if  the  laigest  of  them 
be  alone  made. 


CB.    d«]  BltlUT  JATAtl.  104 

After  making  the  sevearl  redactions  add  up  the  result'' 
ing  years  of  the  planets,  multiply  the  sum  by  3^4  and  divide 
the  prodnot  by  3G5.  The  quotient  will  give  the  length  of  a 
person^s  life  in  years,  monthS|  days,  &e* 

Again,  in  the  A.  V.  of  Saturn  as   before^    mnltiply  the 
figures  of  the    several  signs  from  Aries  by  the  Zodiacal  fac- 
tors and  add  up  the  products.     Multiply  the  figures  in  the 
several  signs  occupied  by  the  Sun  and  other  plan^ta  by  the 
several   planetary   factors  and  add  up  the  products.     Add 
together  the  two   totals*     To   the  sum  add   the  sum  of  the 
figures   resulting   after   making  the   Trikona  and  Ekadhi*' 
patya   reductions  to   the   figures  of  the   A.  Y.  of  Snturn^ 
Multiply  the  sum  by  the  figure  in  the  8th    house   from  the 
ascendant  in  the  A.  V.  of  Satiirn  ;  divide  the  prodnct  by  27  ; 
the  quotient  will  also  give  the  length  of  a  person's  1ife>  pro* 
vided   such  length  is  otherwise  found  to  rta^e  between  84 
and  6G  years  ;  the  length  of  life  will  be  27  yearns  less  than 
the  period  obtained  if  the  person's  age  is  otherwise   found 
to  mnge   from  1  to  88   years   and  27  years  more  than  ther 
period  obtained  if   such   length  be  found  to  rango  between 
67  and  100  years  and  death  will  occur  if.  the  dana  period  be 
a  malefic  ona  .  There  are   brief   processes  for  ascertaining 
by  inspection  whether  the  length  of  life  of  a  person  falls  ixk 
the  first,  or  the  second  or  the   third   section  of   the   maxi- 
mum period  of  100  years  Vide,  the  Aslrological  AphorismiB 
of  Jaimuui. 

Hitherto  we  hate  been  dt-aling  with  the  tables  of 
the  B.  A.  v.  and  S.  A*  Y.  prepared  with  the  figures  re- 
presenting the  benefic  planetary  places.  Tables  can  also  be 
prepared  with  figures  representing  the  miilefic  places  of  the 
planets.  {Vide  note  b,  to  statiza  8).  Special  rules  exist  . 
relating  to  the  prediction  of  events  of  Ufo  with  the  help 
of  the  figures  of  these  tables*  The  reader  is  referred  to 
the  works  of  Parasara. 


110  BElHAIf  JATAKA.  [cH.  lO^ 

*  ■  «  #         • 

CHPTER  X. 

On  AvooaMcw- 

1.  A  poison  gots  wealth  from  Lis  fatliori  molhotg 
onomy^  f  riond,  brotfaor^  wifo  or  servant  acoording  as  tho 
planet  which  occupies  the  10th  bonse  from  the  Lagna  or 
from  the  Moon  is  the  0an,  or  the  Moon,  or  Mars  or 
Mercury,  or  Jupiter  or  Venos  or  Saturn  respeotivety  (a)< 
If  there  be  no  such  planet^  the  avocation:  of  a  pei'son  will 
be  that  stated  for  the  planets  (&)  which  might  be  the 
lords  of  the  Navamsas  occupied  by  the  lordd  of  the  lOtb 
houses  from  Lagna^  the  Moon  and  the  Sun  (e). 

Notes. 

(a).  If  the  10th  house  from  the  ascfendant  and  the 
10th  house  from  the  Moon  be  both  occupied  by  planets,  a 
person  will  acquire  wealth  from  both  sources^  aud  if  several 
planets  occupy  the  ;10th  house  there  will  be  several  sources 
of  wealth. 

(&)•    Vide  stans^as  2  and  3. 

(c)  Suppose  sign  Cancer  is  thei  tjagna ;  the  lOth  house 
from  Cancer  is  Aries;  the  lord  of  Aries  is  Mars;  suppose 
Mars  to  occupy  the  Navamsa  of  Sagittari  ;  the  lord  of 
Sagittari  is  Jupiter  and  the  avocation  stated  for  Jupiter 
(vide  8rd  stanza)  will  be  the  avocation  of  a  person.  It 
also  follows  that  a  person'^s  avocation  will  be  all  the  three 
stated  for  the  lords  of  the  Navamsas  occupied  by  the 
lords  of  the  10th  houses  from  Lagna^  the  Moon  and  the 
Sun. 

2.  If  the  iord  of  the  Navamsa  (a)  be  the   Sun,  a 

person  will  deal  iu  perfumes,  gold,  woollen  fabric,  medeoine, 

aud  the  like.     If  the  lord  be  the  Moon,  he  will  till  lands 
or  deal  iu  the    productions  of   water   (b)   or  get   money 

through  women,  (c)    If  he  be  Mars,  the  person  will  deal 


^H.    10.!)  BBIBAT  JATAltA.  HI 

iu  mebals  or  tniaerttlsi  fire  (d)  or  weapons  and  will  also  ac- 
quire wealth  by  acta  of  boldness ;  if  he  be  Mercury,  the 
person  will  be  a  writer^  an  accountant,  and  the  like  (e)  and 
Will  &lso  Squire  wealth  by   Vftrioua  handicraft  (/> 

Notes. 
(d).     Tkat  is  the  lord  of  the  Nayatnsa  occnpied  by  the 
lord  of  the  10th  house  from  Lagna,  the  Moon  and  the   Sun. 

(h)>  Such  as  pearls,  conch  shells^  whale-bones  and 
the  like^ 

(d).     dy   serving  under  or  otherwise  following   them* 
((Z).    Fire:  he   may  be  the  driver  of  a  fire    engine  or 
a  dealer  in  matches  and  the  like.  ^ 

(d).  By  writing^  commentaries  on  the  works  ot  writers 
and  the  like. 

(/).  Such  as  painting)  book-bindingi  arrow-making 
01^  the  making  of  flower-wreathsj  sandal  paste^  perfumes 
and  the  like» 

$.  If  the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  be  Jupiter ,  a  person 
will  get  Wealtd  through  Brahmins,  the  DeVaS  oi*  learned 
men,  through  mines  (a)  and  the  like  (b)  and  through  acts 
of  virtue  (d)  ;if  he  be  Venus,  the  persob  will  [deal  in  geins,((2) 
silver  and  other  tkietals)  in  cows  and  buffaloes ;  and  if 
the  lord  be  Saturn,  the  persoujwill  acquire  wealth  by  means 
of  hard  labour,  (e)  by  acts  of  torture^  (/)  by  carrying  bttr* 
dens  and  by  low  deeds  unsuited  to  his  rank.  Thus  persons 
acquire  wealth  by  avocation  dtated]  for  the  /lords  of 
Navamsas  occupied  by  the  lords  of  the  10th  house,  {g). 

(a).  The  word  in  the  text  is  Akara  which •  includes 
gold  and  silver  mines,  places  where  salt  is  produced  or 
where  elephants  are  found. 

(b).     Such  as  contract  work. 

15 


112  PBIHAT  JATAKA.  [C5.  J  J. 

(t).  Such  as  sacrificial  riteSj  giftSj  acts  of  chaHtbjri 
pilgrimage,  service  under  (im^  or  preceptor. 

(d).  Sucli  as  diamonds^  rubies,  and  the  like. 

(a).  Such  as  walking  and  the  like. 

(/.)  Either  by  self  torture  ov  torturing  other  creatures* 

{g  )  From  Lagna^  the  Moon  and  the  Sun^ 

4.  If  such  yoga  planet  (a)  occupy  (b)  a  friendly  Bign^ 
a  person  will  acquire  wealth  (in  the  dasa  or  antardasa  period 
of  such  planet)  through  a  friend.  If  such  yoga  planet 
occupy  an  inimical  sign,  the  person  will  get  wealth  through 
his  enemy  ;  and  if  such  planet  occupy  his  own  house,  the 
person  will  get  wealth  by  means  of  his  house.  If,  when 
the  Sun  happens  to  be  the  yoga  planet,  he  occupy  his  exal* 
tation  sign,  the  person  will  acquire  wealth  by  his  own 
powers.  If  (at  the  time  of  birth)  powerful  benefic  planets 
occupy  the  11th  house,  the  Lagna  or  the  2nd  house^  the 

person  will  acquire  wealth  in  various  ways  (c)* 

.     « 

Notes. 

(a).  That  is  either  the  planet  which  occupies  the 
lOth  house  from  the  ascendant  or  the  Moon  or  the  planet 
which  is  the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the  lord  of 
the  10th  house  from  Lagna,  the  Moon  and  thq  Sun. 

(&).    At  the  time  of  birth . 

(c).  fn  other  lyords  he  will  prosper  well  whatever 
may  be  thQ  ^vocation  he  may  choose  to  follow. 


CHAPTBlt  XL 

On  Raja  yoqa  or  thh  Bibth  ot  Kinqs. 

1.    A  ocordiug  to  the  Yavauas  a  person  born  when  three 
ox  more   malefic    planets  are  in     their    exaltation  signs 


CM.    n.]  PBIHAT   JATAKA.  113 

beoomes  rt  (yraonical  king  (a\  According  to  JeevnsarmH  if 
such  planets  be  malefic  a  person  will  never  become  a 
king  (b). 

Notes* 

(a).  U  three  or  more  planets  occupying  their  exal- 
tation signs  be  benefic,  the  person  becomes  a  good  king; 
if  both  benefio  and  malefic  ho  will  becomo  both  a  good  and 
a  bad  king, 

•        •     •  ^ 

(b)^,  Aocordizig  to  Jeeyasarmai  such  a  persoii  beconies 
rich  and  powerful  but  not  a  king*  Varha  Mihira  is  of  the 
opinion  of  the  Yavauas. 

2.  Of  thelfour  planetSi  Mars^  Saturn,  the  Sun,  and  Jupi- 
ter, by  all  the  four  or  any  three  of  them  occupying  exalta. 
tion  signs  while  each  of  the  planets  occupies  the  Lagna,  the 
number  of  Ba jayogas  is  16.  Again^  of  the  same  four  pla- 
nets by  any  two  or  by  any  one  occupying  exaltation  signs 
aad  in  each  case  by  each  of  the  planets  occupying  the 
Lagna  while  the  Moon  occupiiss  sign  Cancer,  the  number 
of   Kajuyogas  is  also  16. 

Notes. 

32  Bajayogas.are  m>entH>ned  in  this  stanza.  A  per^- 
6on  born  under  any  one  of  them  becomes  a  king  :  suppose 
all  the  4  planets-— 'Mars,  Saturn,  the  Suu  and  Jupiter — to 
occupy  their  exaltation  signs  at  the  same  time;  by  any  ono 
of  such  signs  being  the  ascendant  the  number  of  BiajayogHS 
obtained  is  4.  Again,  of  the  same  4  planets  ther^  are  4 
groups,  each  of  three  planets  ^  thus  (1)  Mar?,  Saturn  and> 
the  iSun,  (2)  Mars^  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  (3)  Mars,  the  ISuii 
and  Jupiter,  (4)  Saturn^  the  Sun  and  Jupiter.  In  tho  casu 
of  each  group^  by  all  ilie  three  planets  occupying  their  exaU 
tation  signs  and  by  each  of  such  signs  being  the  rising 
sign,,  the  number  of  Bajayogas  obtained  is  3  ;  there  being  4 


114  BRIHAT  JATAEA.  [CH*   11. 

Ruch  groups  the  number  of  Bajayogaa  obtained  from  tliem 
all  is  4X3  or  12.  Adding  this  to  the  4  yogaa'^al ready  ob« 
tained  we  get  the  first  lO  yogas  mentioned  in  the  text. 

Again,  of  the  same  4  planets,  there  are  6 ^groups  eaoh 
of  2  planets  as  follows  (\)  Mars  and  Saturn^  (i)  Mara  and 
the  Sun,  (3i)  Mars  and  Jupitor,  (4)  Saturn  and  the  San>  (5) 
Saturn  and  Jupiter  and  (6)  the'  Su,n  and  Jupiter.  In  the 
case  of  each  group  by  both  the  planets  occupying  their 
exaltation  signs  and  by  ei^cli  of  such  ^igns  beiog  the- rising 
^igUj,  the  number  of  Bajnyogas  obtained  is.  2.  There  being 
6  such  groups>  the  number  of  yogas  obtained  from  them  all 
is  6X2  or  1^.  In  each  of  thest^  12  cases>the  Moon  occupies 
sign  Cancer.  Again,  of  the  same  4  planets,  by  their  seye-? 
rally  being  in  their  exaltation  signs,  while  such  sign  is  alsa 
the  rising  sign,  the  number  of  Uajayogas  obtained  is  4i^  In 
each  of  thesef  4  cases^  the  Moon  occupies  sign  Oancer.  Add- 
ing these  4  yogas  to  the  12  yogas  already  obtained  we  get 
the  second  IG  yogas  mentioned  in  the  text. 

3.  The  Lagna  or  the  Moon  being  in  Yargottam^  posi-< 
tions,  of  all  the  planets^  exceptiog  the  Moon>by  the  several 
groups  of  four>  five  and  six  planet^  aspecting  the  Lagna  or 
the  Moouj  the  number  of  yogas  obtained  is  %2:. 

Notes. 

The  six  planets  are,  the  Sun>  Mars^  Meroury  Jupiter^ 
Yenus  and  Saturn.  Of  thpse  there  are  15  groups  each  o£ 
4  planets  as  followa : 

(1)  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiten 

(2)  „  „.  „  Yenus.. 
(3):  „  .  „  „  Saturn^ 
(4)  ,,.  „  Jupitev,  Yenus. 
(*'>)  :>  n  ,»  Satunv 
(6)  ,x  M  Yenuia,        ,jk 


OH^    II]  BBIHAT  JATARA.  115 

(7)  The  Son,  Mercury,  Japiter^  Venus. 

(8)  „  „  ,>        Saturn. 

(9)  „  »        Venu3,  „ 

(10)  „    Jupi(ie^>  „  » 

(11)  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venas^ 

(12)  „         „  ^  Saturn., 
(li^)          „         „  Venus^      „ 
(14)          „    Jupiter  '„             ^ 
(16)  Mercuiy,   ,^  ,>            » 

Again,  of  the  same  6  planets  there  are  six  groups  taoh 
of  i|ye  planets  as  {oUows : 

(1)    The  Sun,  Mars^  Mercury,  Jupiter,.  Venus. 

Satura. 

All  the  6  planets  form  again  into  one  group^  Thus 
there  are  22  groups.  By  the  planets  of  each  group  aspeo- 
ting  the  rising  sign  in  its  Vargothama  position,  the  numbev^ 
of  yogas  obtained  is  22 ;  and  by  their  aspectiag  tbp  Moon  in 
its  Varguthama  position,  the  nnmber  of  yogas  obtained  is 
again  22.  According  to  Mandayya,  by  each  of  the  12  signs 
from  Ari^s  being  either  the  rising  sign  or  the-sign  occupied 
by  the  Moon  in  the  case  o£  each  yoga,,  the  number  of  yo^ 
gas  obtained  is  44X12  or  &28. 

4.  When  Saturn  occupies  sign  Aquarius,  the  Sun 
sign.  Aries,,  the  Moon  sign  Taurus,  Meroury  sign  Gemini,. 
Jupiter  sign  Leo,  and  Mai*s  sign  Scorpio>a  person  bora 
becomesakingr  when  the  rising  sign  is  Aquaraus.or  whei> 
It  is  Aries  or  when  it  is  Tauru?. 

Again^  when  Saturn  occupies  sign  Libra,  the  Mooob 
sign  Taurus,,  the.  Sun  and  Mercary  sign  Virgo,,  Venus  sigot 


(2) 

>j          n             w 

39. 

(3) 

>»               fi                      >9 

Venus 

(4) 

„        „      Jupiter 

>♦ 

(5) 

„   Ifercury     „ 

99 

C©) 

Mars,     „            „ 

9f 

116  BBIIIAT  JATAKA.  [OH.    &• 

Libra,  Mars  sign  Aries,  and  Jupiter  sign  Oancor,  a  person 
born  becomes  a  king  when  the  rising  sign  is  Libra  or  whan 
i  t  is  Taurus. 

5  When  Mtirs  occupies  sign  Caprioorh,  the  Sun  and 
the  Moon  sign '  Sagittari,  Saturn  sign  Capricorn  and  when 
the  rising  sign  is  also  Capricorn,  a  person  born  beoomea  a 
king. 

Again  when  the  dicing  sign  is  C>iprioorn  and  when  Mara 
and  the  Moon  occupy  it,  and  when  the  Sun  occupies,  sign 
Sagittari,  a  person  born  becomes  a  king. 

Agaiu  when  Aries  is  the  rising  sign  and  when  the  Sun 
occupies  it,  when  Saturn  and  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Libra 
and  Jupiter  occupieasign  Sagittari,  a  person  becomes  a  king. 

6.  When  the  rising  sign  is  Taurus  and  the  Moon  occa- 
piea  it,  when  the  Sun  occupieasign  Leo,  Jupiter  sign  Scropia 
and   Saturn  sign  Aquarius  a  person  born  becomes  a  king. 

Again,  wlien  the  rising  sign  is  Capricorn,,  and  when 
Saturn  occupies  it,  and  when  the  Moon  occupies  the  3rd 
bouse,  Mara  the  6th  houae.  Mercury  the  9th  honae,  and  Ju- 
piter the  I2th  houae,  a  peraon  born  becomes  a  viistuous  and 
&moua  king. 

7.  When  the  Moon  audi  Jupitei  occupy  sign  Sagittari^ 
and  when  Mars  occupies  the  first  half  of  Capricorn,  a  person 
bron  becomes  a  king  when  Pisces  is  the  rising  sign  and  Venus 
occupies  it  or  when  Virgo  is  rising  sign  and  Mercury  occu-* 
pies  it.. 

Again,  when  the  rising  sign  is  Virgo  and  when  Mercury 
ecupies.it,  when  Mars  and  Saturn  occupy  the  5th  house,, 
when  the  Moon^  Jupiter  and  Venua  occupy  the  4th, house,  a 
person  born  becomes  a  king. 

8.  When  Piacea  ia  the  rising  aign,  and  the  Moon  occu*- 
piea  it,,  and  when  Aquaviua,  Capricorn  and  Leo  are  respec^ 


CH.  IK]  bhihat  jataka,  117 

lively  oooaipied  by  SainrD^  Mar8>  and  Ihe^Sun,  a  person  bom 
becomes  a  king. 

Again^  wben  Mara  occupies  sign  Aries  and  Jupiter 
sign  Cancer,  a  person  born  becomes  a  king  when  Aries  is 
tbe  rising  sign^  also  wken  Cancer  is  the  rising  sign. 

9.  When  Cancer  is  the  rising  sign  and  Jupiter  occu* 
pies  it,  and  when  the  Moon^  YgQ<i)3  ^^^  Mercury  occupy  sign 
Taurus  and  the  Sun  sign  Aries>  a  person  born  becomes  a 
powerful  king. 

10    When  Capricorn  is   the   rising  sign   and  Saturn 
pies  it)   when  the   signs  Aries,   Cancer  and  Leo  are    occn-* 
pied  by  their  lords  and  when  Gemini  and  Libra  are  respec- 
'    tively  occupied  by  Mercury  and  Venus,  a  person  born  be- 
comes a  famous  king* 

11,  When  Virgo  is  the  rising  sign,  and  Mercury  occu- 
pies it,  when  Venus  occupies  fiign  Gemini,  the  Moon  and 
JupiterJ  occupy  sign  Pisces^  and  Mars  and  saturn  occupy 
sign^Capricorn,  a  person   born  becomes  a  King.    

12.  Persons  born  under  the  various  yogas  described 
above,  though  they  may  be  born  in  low  families  Will  be- 
come kings.  If  such  persons  are  born  in  a  king's  family- 
they  will  doubtless  beoome  kings.  We  shall  now  proceed 
to  describe  certain' yogas,  persons  born  under  which  will 
become  kings  if  they  belong  to  a  king's  family  and  will 
become  rich  if  otherwise* 

13*  When  three  or  more  planets  are  powerful  and 
occupy  either  their  houses  or  Exaltation  signs  or  their 
Moolatrikona  signs,  a  person  born  becomes  a  king  if  he 
belongs  to  a  king's  family* 

Again^  when  five  or  more  planets  are  powerful  and 
occupy  their  houses  or  ezaltatiou  signs  or  their  Moolatri- 
kona signs  a  person  born  becomes  a  king  even  if  he  be  born 


118  fittlHAt  JATAKA.  t'C'H*     11. 

hi  a  low-fatniiy.    It  in  eithe)r  cafiOi  the  nnmber  of  j^oweriTul 
.  planets  be  less  than   three  or  ^ve,  the    persons  described 
nbove  will  not  become  kings  but  will  become  only  rlcL 

14.  When  Aries  is  the  rising  sign  and  ilie  Bnn  atid 
Moon  occupy  it>  WheA  Mars  occupies  sign  Capricorn. 
Saturn  sign  Aquarius,  and  Jupiter  sign  fiagittari^  a  person 
born  becomes  a  king,  if  he  belong  to  a  king^s  familyi  and 

'  will  become  only  rich  if  otherwise. 

Not^s. 

According  to  another  reading,  the  Sun  is  made  to 
occupy  sign  Ii€^  and  the  yoga  remains  the  same  in  tother 
respects. 

15.  When  Yenus  occupies  the  4th  house^  and  when 
l^uch  house  is  his  owt),  when  the  Moon  occupies  the  9th 
house,  and  when  the  other  planets  occupy  the  Srd,  1st  and 
lltli  housefij  a  person  born  becomes  a  king,  if  he  belong  to 
a  king's  family  ati'd  only  rich  if  otherwise. 

Notes. 

As  Venus  is  said  to  be  in  his  Swakshetra  he  might  be 
either  is  sign  Taurus  or  in  sign  Libra.  The  Lagn  a  must 
therefore  be  either  sign  Aquarius  or  sign  Cancer  respec- 
tively. As  the  Moon  is  said  to  be  in  thiB  9th  house^  he  occu- 
pies sign  Libra  in  the  former  case>  and  sign  Pisces  in  the 
hitter,  and  as  the  other  plants  are  said  to  occupy  the  Srd, 
1st  and  11th  houses  from  Lagna^  these  houses  are  signs 
Aries>  Aquarius  uud  Sagittari  in  the  one  case,  and  Virgo^ 
Caucer  aud  TaUrus  in  tha  other.  Thus  2  yoorus  are  referred 
to  in  this  stanza.       ^-^^t  '^ 

16.  When  Mercury  is  powerful  and  occupies  the 
rising  sign,  (a)  when  a  benefic  planet  (6)  occupies  the  9th 
house(c)  and  when  the  other  planets(c{)occupy  the  9th,  2nd| 


CH.  11.]  ita'Bki  iikkA.  lli 

Zti,  6tfa,  lOtb^and  11th  houses  (e),  a  person  Dorii  becomes  a 
virtuous  king  if  he  helobg  to  a  kiug^s  family  and  only  rich 
if  otherwise. 

Notes. 

(a).    This  may  be  any  one  of  the  12  signs* 

(by    This  is  either  Jupiter  or  Venus. 

(e).    The  4th  house  according  to  a  diflferent  reading, 

(d).  When  one  or  more  of  the  other  planets  according 
to  commentator. 

(e).     One  of  these  houses  according  to  commentator. 

17.  When  Taurus  is  the  rising  sign^  and  the  Mooii 
occupies  it^  when  Jupiter  occupies  the  2nd  house,  Saturn  the 
6th  honse^  and  the  other  planets  the  11th  house,  a  person 
born  becomes  a  kiog  if  he  belong  to  a  king's  family,  and 
only  rich  if  otherwise. . 

Again^  when  Jupiter  occupies  the  4th  housei  the  Sun 
and  the  Moon  occupy  the  10th  house,  when  Saturn  occupies 
the  Lagna  (a)  and  when  the  other  planets  occupy  the  11th 
house,  a  person  born  becomes  a  king  if  he  be  born  in  a 
king's  family^  and  only  rich  if  otherwise* 

Notes. 

(a.)  This  may  be  any  one  of  the  12  signs  accordiiig  to 
commentator. 

18.  When  the  Moon  occupies  the  10th  house^  Saturn 
the  llth  house,  Jupiter  the  rising  sign,  Mercury  and  Mars 
the  2Dd  house,  and  the  Sun  and  Yenus  occupy  the  4th  house^ 
a  person  born  becomes  a  king  if  he  belong  to  a  king's  fa- 
mily,  and  only  rich  if  otherwise. 

Again,  when  Mars  and  Saturn  occupy  the  rising  sign, 
when  the  Moon  ocdnpies  the  4th  house,  Jupiter  the  7th 
house,  Venus  the  9th  house,  th&  Sun  the  10th  house,  and 

15 


120  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [OH.   11* 

Mercury  the  11  tb  house,  a  person^  bora  becomes  a  king  if 
he  belong  to  a  kiug^s  family,  and  only  rich  if  otherwise. 

19.  Of  the  planets  producing  a  Rajayoga  either  in  the 
Antardasa  periods  of  those  which  occupy  the  10th  house  or 
the  Lagua  (a)  or  in  that  of  the  most  powerful  planet  (]b),  a 
person  obtains  kingdom  and  be  loses  it  and  courts  the 
friendship  of  another  king  in  the  Antardasa  periods  of  the 
planets  occupying  inimical  or  depression  signs  (c). 

Notes. 

(a).  If  there  be  planets  both  in  the  Lagna  and  in  the 
lOth  house  or  If  there  be  several  planets  in  either,  then  in 
the  Antardasa  period  of  the  most  powerful  of  them. 

(b).  If  there  be  no  planets  both  in  Lagna  and  in  the 
lOth  house. 

*  (c).  If  such  planets  be  powerful  the  king  will  lose  his 
kingdom  permanently,  and  if  they  be  not  powerful,  he  will 
recover  it  by  the  help  of  his  allies. 

20.  When  Jnpiter,  Venus  and  Mercury  occupy  tbe 
rising  sign,  (a)  when  Saturn  occupies  the  7th  house  and  the 
Sun  the  lOth  house,  a  person  born  will  live  in  great  comfort 
and  luxury,  (b) 

Again,  when  powerful  benefic  signs  form  the  Kendras 
and  malefic  planets  occupy  maletio  signs,  a  person  born  be- 
comes rich  and  the  chief  of  hunters  and  robbers* 

Notes. 

(a).  The  rising  sign  is  Aries  according  to  com- 
mentator. The  interpretation  given  of  this  portion  of  the 
text  is  objected  to  by  some  on  the  ground  that  when  Venus 
and  Mercury  (the  inferior  planets)  occupy  the  rising  sign  the 
Sun  cannot  occupy  the  lOth  house — a  place  more  than  60 
degrees  removed  from  them.  For  the  greatest  elongations 
of  the  two  planets  from*  the  Sun  are  respectively  47  and  29 


OH.  12.]  BUHAT  JATAKA.  121 

degrees.     Aecordiugly  the  following  interpretation  is  pro- 
posed:— 

"  If  the  rifliog  sign  be  thehoose  of  Japiter,  Yenaa  or  Ueroary*' 

Bhatta  Utpala,  the  commentator,  while  granting  the 
validity  of  the  objection,  says,  that  the  interpretation  objec- 
ted to  has  the  support  of  Garga  whom  he  quotes.  A  similar 
remark  applies  to  the  Yajra  and  other  yogas  described  in 
stanza  5  of  the  nexfc  Ohapter,  and  in  stanza  6  of  the  same, 
Yaraha  Mibira  while  admitting  the  impossibility  of  the 
yoga,  says  that  his  task  is  simply  to  state  the  views  of  the  ^ 
ancient  writers  and  nothing  more.  Vide  notes  to  stanza 
6,  Chapter  XII. 

(6).    Though  he  may  be  poor. 

(c).    This  portion  of  the  text  is  interpreted  by  some 
as  follows : 

**  When  powerful  benefio  planetf  ocoapy  the  Eendras" 

But  this  interpretation  is  opposed  to  Garga  whom  the 
commentator  quotes. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  On  Nabhasa  Togas. 

1.  Hincj  ten  and  eighty  multiplied  respectively  by 
three^  three  and  four  give  the  sums  of  the  numbers  of  the 
first  two^  the  firs4  three^  and  all  the  four  groups  of  Nabhasa 
yogas  (a).  The  Yavanas  treat  extensively  of  one  thousand 
and  eight  hundred  of  such  yogas  (6).  We  shall  here  sum- 
marize them. 

Notes. 

(a).    Curiously  enough  the   author    adopts   a   rather 
circuitous  method  of  stating  the  numbers   of  the  several 
groups  of  Nabhasa  yogas.  The  statement  amounts    to   an 
Algebraical  problem  :  find  4  numbers  such  that  the  Ist  +  the 


2iia,=9x3=27.1flt+2nd+3rcl=i0X3==80.l8t+2nd+8rdH;. 
4tli=8  X  4=32.  It  is  olear  that  the  number  of  the  last  group 
=82—80=2.  The  pumber  of  the  8rd  group=30— 27=8. 
The  number  of  the  first  and  seoond  gproi^p  is  given  ^a  27. 
According  to  the  commentator^  the  1st  group  consists  of 
20  yogas  and  the  2i^d  of  7.  la  other  words  what  the  author 
wants  to  say  is  briefly  this — The  Nabhasa  yogas  consist  of 
4  groups  as  follows : 

Akriti  yog^s  20  ;  Sankhya  yogap  7  ;  Asraya  yogas.  8  ; 
i^d  D^la  yogas  2. 

(h).  Vide  note  at  the  end  of  the  Chapter  for  the 
particulars  of  the  180©  Nabhasa  yogas. 

(c).  The  author  say^  that  his  82  yogas  contain  the 
1800  yogas  of  the  Yavanas. 

2.  According.'to  Satyachariyar  if  all  the  planets  occupy 
(a)  the  moyable^  fixed  or  common  signs^  the  yogas  are 
respectively  known  as  Bajju^  Musala^  and  Nala.  and  these 
three  form  the  group  of  Asraya  yogas.  Again  according  to 
Parasaraj  if  the  benefio  planets  (h)  occupy  the  Kendras  {cy 
the  yoga  is  known  as  Srikor  Mala;  and  if  malefic  planets 
(d)  occupy  the  Kendras  (e)  the  yoga  is  known  as  Sarpa. 
These  two  form  the  group  of  Dala  yogas* 

Not^s. 
(a).     One  or  two  or  three  or  all  the  four.of  the  signs. 
According  to  some  thi^  planets  ought  to  occupy  all  the  four 
signs.    This  is  opposed  to  Qarga. 

(&).  Yiz.j  Mercury;  Jupiter  and  Yenus  according  to 
Garga. 

(e).  Three  of  the  Kendras^  while  there  are  no  mt^lefio 
planets  in  any  of  the  keudra  houses  according  to  Bada- 
rayana. 

(d)*  Yiz : — The  San^  Mars  and  Saturn  according  to 
Garga. 


€H.   12.]  BRIj^Ai;  JA^A^A.  123 

(e).  Three  oC  the  kendras,  while  there  are  no  benefio 
planets  in  any  o£  the  keodri^  houses  according  to  Bada- 
rajana. 

8.  Other  Astrologers  say  that  the  Asraja  yogas,  are 
identical  with  the  Tava  (a),  Abja  (b)^  Vajra  (c),  Aiidaja  (d), 
GoIh  {e),  and  the  like  yogas  (f),  and  that  when  the  effects  of 
planets  occupying  the  kendras  are  described  the  effects  of 
Dala  yogas  are  also  described  and  they  produce  no  separate 
effect^  (g). 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  explains  the  reason  why 
certain  Astrologers  have  failed  to  treat  of  the  Asraya  and 
Dala.  yogas  in  their  works. 

(a) J  {b)y  (c).  Vide  stanza  5. 
(d).     Vide  stanza  4. 

(e).     Vide  stanza  10.  , 

(/).  The  like  yogas :  such  as  Sakata  (stanza  4), 
Kedara>  Sula  and  yuga  (all  stanza  10)* 

The  Asraya  yogas  may  be  these  and  may  not  be  these; 
hence  the  author  has  deemed  it  advisable  to  treat  them 
sepHrately.  For  instance,  if  all  planets  occupy  signs  Gemini 
and  Sagittari — 2  of  the  common  sign^ — when  one  of  these 
is  filso  the  rising  sign^  the  yoga  is  known  both  as  Vajra  and 
Nala ;  but  if  any  other  sign  be  the  rising  sign^  it  is  not  a 
Vajra  yoga  but  only  a  Nala  yoga. 

ig).  As  regards  the  Dala  yogas^  it  is  said  that  other 
writers  have  described  the  effects  of  benefic  and  of  malefic 
planets  occupying  the  Kendras  and  as  these  are  also  the 
effects  of  the  two  Dala  yogas  they  have  omitted  to  treat  of 
them  separately  ;  the  author  treats  of  these  separately  in 
order  to  make  it  known  that  the  two  are  Nabhasa  yogas 
and  as  such  their,  effects ,  are  felt  throughout  life/  (vide 
Stanza  19). 


124  BBIHAT   JATAKA.  L^^.    12. 

4.  If  hII  the  planets  occupy  any  two  adjacent  Kendras> 
the  yoga  is  known  as  Gada  (a).  If  they  all  occupy  the 
ascendant  and  the  7th  house^  the  yoga  is  known  as  Sakata. 
If  all  the  planets  occupy  the  4th  and  the  lOtb  house  the 
yoga  is  known  as  Yihaga.  If  all  the  planets  occupy  the 
ascendant,  the  r>th  and  9th  houses,  the  yoga  is  known  as 
Sringataka  and  if  all  the  planets  occupy  other  triangular 
houses  the  yoga  is  known  as  Hala  {by 

Notes. 
The  author  now  proceeds    to  describe  the  20   Akrit^ 
yogas.    5  of  them  are  described  in  this  stanza. 

(a).  This  may  be  in  4  ways  :  All  the  four  planets  may 
occupy  (1),  the  Ist  and  the  4th  houses^  (r^),  the  4th  and  7th 
houses  (8),  the  7th  and  the  10th  houses  and  (4),  the  10th  and 
the  1st  house.  The  Yavanas  consider  these  4  as  four  dis- 
tinct yogas  and  call  tliem  respectively  aa  Gada^  Sankha^ 
Yibbuka  and  Dwaja.     (Vide  note  at  the  end  of  the  Chapter.) 

(b)*  This  may  be  in  three  ways  :  all  the  planets  may 
occupy,  (1),  the  2nd,  6th  and  10th  houses,  (2),  the  8d,  7th 
and  1 1th  houses,  (8)  the  4th,  8th  and  12th  houses. 

5.  If  the  benefic  planets  occupy  the  ascendant  and 
the  7th  house  while  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  4th  and 
lOth  houses  the  Yoga  is  known  as  Yajra  ;  and  if  the  reverse 
be  the  case  (a)  the  yoga  ia  known  as  Yava.  Again,  if  all  the 
planets  occupy  the  four  Kendras  the  yoga  is  known  aa 
Eamala,  and  if  they  occupy  the  four  Panaphara  (6)  or 
the  four  Apoklima(c)  houses,  the  yoga  is  known  asYapi. 

Notes. 

0 

In  this  stanza,  4  more  Akriti  yogas  are  described. 

(a).  That  is  if  the  malefio  planets  occupy  the  ascen- 
dant and  the  7th  house  while  the  benefic  planets  occupy 
the  4th  and  10th  houses. 

{h).    That  is  the  2nd,  5th,  8th  and  1 1th  houses. 

(c).    That  is  the  3rd,  6th>  9th  and  12th  houses. 


€H.  12.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA*  .     125 

'  6.  I  have  described  the  Yajra  and  other  (a)  yogas 
adopting  the  view  of  former  writers  (5).  How  can  Mercury 
and  Venus  occupy  the  4ih  sign  from  the  Sun  (c)?- 

Notes. 
(a).   'That  is  the  Tava  yoga  Rnd  the  yoga  mentioned 
in  the  beginning  of  stanza  20^  of  the  Chapter  on  Rajayogn. 

(6).     Maya^  Yavana^  Qarga  and  others. 

(c)«  According  to  Mr*  Sundareswara  Sronty  of  Trivadi^ 
the  Yajra  and  Yava  yogas  refer  to  the  positions  of  the  pla- 
nets in  the  Bbava  Chakra  nnd  not  to  their  positions  in  their 
Rasi  Chakra  as  supposed  by  Yaraha  Mihira.  He  is  there- 
fore of  opinion  that  Oarga  and  other  writers  have  not  erred 
in  treating  of  these  yogas  as  possible  ones.  This  we  shall 
DOW  explain : 

Yaraha  Mihira  says  ^  How  can  Mercury  and  Yenus 
occupy  the  4th  Bign  from  the  Sun''  The  word  used  in  the 
text  is  Bhavana  which  means  a  sign  of  the  Zodiac  {yiie 
stanza  4,  Chapter  I).  If  the  Ynjra  and  Yava  yogas  refer  to 
the  positions  of  the  planets  in  the  Rasi  Chakra  then  Yaraha 
Mihira  is  right  in  declaring  that  the  ancient  writers  have 
erred,  but  not  if  the  yogas  refer  to  the  positions  of  the 
planets  in  the  Bhava  Chakra.  Indeed  in  nil  yogas  where 
the  positions  of  the  planets  are  stated  with  reference  to 
particular  Bhavas  or  houses  from  the  ascendant,  they  refer  to 
Bhava  Chakra.  As  it  is  somewhat  tedious  to  construct  this 
Chakra  (table),  most  of  the  astrologers  confound  it  with  the 
other  Chttkra  and  wrongly  apply  aU  yogas  to  the  Rasi 
Chakra.  This  is  one  of  fruitful  sources  of  error  in  astrologi- 
cal predictions ;  we  shall  now  explain  what  is  meant  by 
Bhava  Chakra.  For  the  process  of  constructing  it,  the 
reader  is  referred  to  the  Appendix  at  the  end  of  the  Book. 

Both  Rasi  and  Bhava  Chaki-as  are  divisions  of  the  eclip- 
tic ;  the  former  is  division  into  12  equal  parts  and  the  latter 


126  BSIHAT  JATAKA.  [OU.   12. 

£S  division  into  12  unequal  parts  depending  upon  th^  lati- 
tude of  the  plaoe* 

Bhaskara  Charyar  defines  Bbava  Chakra  as  follows  in 
his  Qola  Adhyaya : 

'<  The  point  where  the  ecliptic  cuts  the  horizon  in  the 
east  is  known  as  eastern  or  rising  Lagna,  and  in  the  west  as 
the  western  or  setting  Lagna^  and  the  points  where  the 
meridian  of  the  place  cuts  the  ecliptic  are  known  as 
Madhya  or  middle  Lignas. — The  10th  and  4th  Lagnas.'' 
These  4  points  are  respectively  the  middle  points  of  the 
1st,  7th^  1 0th  and  4th  Bhavas.  The  two  points  of  trisec- 
tion  of  the  distance  between  the  middle  points  of  the  1st 
and  4th  Bhavas  are  respectively  the  middle  points  of  the 
2nd  and  3rd  Bhavas.  The  two  points  of  trisection  of  the 
distance  between  the  middle  points  of  the  4th  and  7th 
Bhavas  are  respectively  the  middle  points  of  the  5th  and 
6th  Bhavas.  The  two  points  of  trisection  of  the  distance 
between  middle  points  of  the  7th  and  10th  Bhavas  are  the 
middle  points  of  the  8th  and  9th  Bhavas.  And  the  two 
points  of  trisection  of  the  distance  between  the  middle 
points  of  the  10th  and  1st  Bhavas  are  the  middle  points  of 
the  11th  and  12th  Bhavas.  Thus  we  have  obtained  the 
middle  points  of  the  12  Bhavas.  Now  if  we  bisect  these 
twelve  divisions  of  the  ecliptic,  the  space  between  the  two 
.  points  of  bisection  immediately  on  both  sides  of  the  middle 
point  of  each  Bhava  will  form  a  Bhava. 


CO.   12.]  BRIHAT  JJLTAU.  127 

Now  as  the  ecliptic  is  incliued  to  the  equator  by  about 
23  degrees,  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  will  always  be  removed 
from  tlie  pole  of  the  equator  by  about  23  degrees  and  will 
describe  round  it  a  circle  iu  the  course  of  e*  ch  dny.  So 
that  every  day  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  meridian  will 
coincide  with  the  plane  of  the  meridian  of  the  place  twice. 
Now  the  point  where  th«  ecliptic  meridian  bisects  the  eclip- 
tic is  known  in  Astronomy  as  the  noaa-gesimal  point.  Call 
this  point  N.  ChU  the  point  where  the  meridian  cuts  the 
ecliptic  M  and  the  points  whet*e  the  horizon  cuts  the  eclip7 
tic  in  the  east  and  west  as  E  and  W  respectively. 

W B 

M    N 

So  that  N  E  =  N  W  =  90  dwgrees  =  8  signs,  and 
M  E  is  always  3  bhavas  and  M  W  is  also  3  bhavas^  IS.  being 
the  middle  point  of  the  10th  Bha?a. 

Now  when  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  meridian  coincides 
with  the  plane  of  the  meridian  of  ttie  place^  N  coincides 
with  M  and  therefore  N  M  vanishes  and  the  Rasi  and 
Bhava  Ohakras  coincide.  This  will  occur  twice  a  day. 
At  other  times  they  will  diflfer.  Now  in  the  higher  lati*' 
tudes  the  angle  between  the  two  meridian  lines  inci  eases. 
F(ide  Spherical  Trigonometry).  Therefore  the  distance 
N  M  also  increases  and  M  W  accordingly  diminishes  and  it 
may  even  become  less  than  47  and  27  degreef^^  and  it  never- 
theless contains  B  bhavas.  So  that  it  is  possible  for  Mer- 
cury and  Venus  to  occupy  M  (the  10th  bhava)  while  the 
Sun  occupies  W  (the  7th  bhava),  i.  e.,  Venus  and  Mercuiy 
may  occupy  the  4tli  bhava  from  the  Sun.      So  that  Qarga 

I 

and  othnr  writers  have  not  erred  if  the  Vajra  and  Ya/a 
yogas  refer  to  the  positions  of  the  planets  in  the  Bhava 
Chakra. 

7.  If  all  the  planets  occupy  the  four  signs  (a)  from 
the  ascendant,   the  yoga   is  known    as    Yupa;    if    they 

IG 


128  BBIHAT  JATAEi.  [cH.    12. 

occupy  tbe  four  sig^a  {b)  from  the  foarth  hoase^  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Ishu  or  Bana  ;  if  they  occupy  the  four  signs  (c) 
from  the  seventh  hoase>  the  yoga  is  known  as  Sakti  ;  and 
if  they  occupy  the  four  signs  from  the  10th  house  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Danda. 

Notes. 
In  this  stanza  the  anfchor  describes  four  more  Akriti 
yogas. 

(a).  That  is  the  ascendant  and  the  2nd^  3rd  and  4th 
houses. 

(Z>).     That  is  the  Uh,  5th,  6th  and  7th  houses. 

(c).    That  is  the  7th,  8th,  9th  and  10th  houses. 

(d).  That  is  the  10th,  11th  and  12th  houses  and  the 
ascendant. 

8*  If>  as  before,  all  the  planets  occupy  the  seven 
signs  (a)  from  the  ascendant  the  yoga  is  known  as  Nau  ; 
if  they  occupy  the  seven  signs  (b)  from  the  fourth  house, 
the  yoga  is  known  as  Kuta  ;  if  they  occupy  the  seven 
signs  (c)  from  the  seventh  house,  the  yoga  is  known  as 
Ohhatra  ;  and  if  they  occupy  the  seven  signs  (cZ)  from  the 
tenth  house  the  yoga  is  known  as  Chapa.  Again  if  all  the 
planets  occupy  the  seven  houses  beginning,  from  a  Pan- 
phara  or  Apoklima  house,  the  yoga  is  known  as  Ardha- 
Ghandra  (ej. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza,  the  author  describes  5  more  Akriti 
yogas. 

(a).  That  is,  the  1st,  2nd,  8rd,  4th,  Sth,'  6th  and  7th 
houses. 

(b).    That  is  from  the  4th  to  the  10th  house. 

(c).  That  is  from  the  7th  to  the  12th  house  and  the 
ascendant. 


OH.  12.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  129 

((2).    That  is  from  the  10th  to  the  12th  house  and 
from  the  asoendant  to  the  4th  house. 

(e)  As  there  are  4  Pauaphara  and  4  Apoklima  houses 
the  Ardha-Chandra  yogas  are  of  8  kinds :  viz.^  all  the 
planets  may  occupy  ( 1)  from  the  2nd  to  the  8th  house^  (2), 
from  the  8rd  to  the  9th  house^  (8)|  from  the  5th  to  the  11th 
house,  (4),  from  the  6th  to  the  12th  house>  (5)^  from  the  8th 
to  the  2Dd  house,  (6)  from  the  9th  to  the  8rd  house,  (7), 
from  the  llth  to  the  5th  house,  (8),  from  the  12th  to  the 
6th  house* 

9-    If  the  planets  (a)  occupy  the  six  alternate  signs  (5  ) 
beginning  from  the22od  house  the  yoga  is  known  as  Samu- 
dra,  and  if  they  occupy  the  six  alternate  signs  (c)  begin- 
ning from  uscondant  the  yoga  is  known  as  Ohakra.    Thus 
the  Akrita  yogas  have  been  described  briefly* 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  remaimog  2 
(out  of  20)  Akriti  yogas* 

(a).     All  the  seven  planets. 

(b).    That  is,  the  2nd,  4th,  6th,  8th,  10th  and  12th 
houses* 

(c)    That  is  the  1st,  Srd,  5th,  7th,  9th  and  1 1th  houses. 

10*  If  all  the  planets  occupy  any  seven  signs  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Yallaki ;  if  they  occupy  any  six  signsi  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Damiui  ;  if  they  occupy  any  five  signs  it  is 
known  as  Pasa;  if  any  four  signs»  it  is  known  as  Kedara ; 
if  any  three  signs  it  is  known  as  Sula ;  if  any  two  signs,  it 
is  known  as  ynga  ,*  and  if  they  occupy  a  single  sign,  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Gola.  When  any  of  these  Sankhya  yogas  are 
at  the  same  time  any  other  Nabhasa  yogas,  they  are  to  be 
treated  as  belonging  to  the  latter  class  (a). 


180  BitlHAT  JATACA.  [OB-    l2* 

Notes. 

(a).  For  instance  the  Qada,  Sakata  and  Yihaga  yogas 
described  in  stanza  4  are  to  be  treated  only  as  such  and  not 
as  Yuf^a  yogas  described  in  this  stanva  ;  the  Sringutaka  and 
Hala  yogas  described  in  stanza  4  are  to  be  treated  only  as 
saoh  and  not  as  Sula  yogas  described  in  this  stanza.  Again> 
the  Yajra,  Yava,  Kainala  and  Yapi  yogas  described  in 
stanza  5  as  well  as  the  Yupa>  Ishn^  S.akti  and  Dauda  yogas 
described  in  stanza  7  shall  not  be  confounded  with  the 
Kadava  yogas  described  in  this  stanza»     And  so  on* 

11.  A  person  born  under  a  Rajju  yoga  will  be  jealous 
of  the  wealth  of  others^  will  proceed  to  foreign  lauds  and 
will  be  fond  of  travelling;  a  person  born  under  a  Musala 
yoga  will  be  respectable,  rich,  and  will  engage  in  various 
undertakings ;  and  a  person  born  under  a  Nala  yoga  will 
be  of  defective  organs,  settled  views,  rich  and  skilled  in 
work.  Again,  a  person  born  under  a  Srik  yoga  will  live  in 
comfort  and  luxury,  and  one  born  under  a  Sarpa  yoga^  will 
be  miserable  in  many  ways. 

Notes. 
In  this  stanza,  the  author  describes   the  effects  of  the 
three  Asraya  yogas  and  of  the  two  Dala  yogas. 

12.  If  the  Asraya  yogas  partake  at  the  same  time  of 
the  character  of  other  yogas  they  should  be  treated  as  the 
latter ;  otherwise  they  produce  the   effects  described  for 

them. 

Notes. 

This  subject  has  already   been  discussed   in  stanza  3. 

For  iuHtance,  if  a  Rajju  yoga  or  a  Musala  yoga  or  a  Nala 

yoga  partake  of  the  nature  of  a  Kamala  yoga  (stanza  5)   it 

should  be  treated  as  the  latter. 

13.  A  person  born  under  a  Oada  yoga  will  perform 
sacrificial  rites,  will  be  rich^  and  will  ever  be  engaged  in  the 


OH.    12.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  181 

acqaisition  of  wealth;  a  person  born  under  a  Saki^ta  yoga 
will  live  by  means  of  carts,  will  be  afflicted  with  diseiises^ 
and  will  have  a  mean  wife;  a  person  born  nnder  a  Vihnga 
yoga  will  live  by  cnrrying  messages^  will  be  fond  of  travels^ 
and  will  Ciose  quarrels  ;  a  person  born  under  a  Sringataka 
yoga  will  be  ha(>|)y  in  the  latter  end  ot  life  (a)  and  a  person 
born  under  a  Hala  yoga  will  till  lands* 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  5 
Akriti  yogas. 

(a).  The  word  in  the  text  is  ''  Chira  Sukhu''  This  is 
interpreted  by  some  to  mean  *'  hnppy  for  a  long  time." 
This  interpretation  is  opposed  to  Qarga. 

14     A  person  born  under  a  Vajra  yoga  will  be  happy 
both  at   the  beginning  and   end  of  life>  will  be  a  general 
favorite  and  wilVbe  bold  in^6ght.     A  person  born  in  a  Yava 
yoga  will  be  powerful,  and    will  be  happy  at  the  middle  of 
ife.     A  person  born  under  a  Pad  ma  (Kamala)  yoga  will  be 
of  grent  renowni  will   be  greatly   happy   and    possessed  of 
many  attainments.    A  person  born  under  a  Vapi  yoga  will 
live  in   poor  comfort  for  a  long  timCi  will  bury  his  wealth 
under  ground  and  will  be  a  miser. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza^  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  4 
more  Akriti  yogas. 

15.  A  person  born  under  a  Yupa  yoga  will  be  liberal  in 
gift  and  will  perform  high  saorificial  rights.  A  person 
born  under  a  Bana  (Ishu)  yoga  will  indulge  in  torture>  will 
be  a  jailor  and  will  make  arrows.  A  person  born  under  a 
S:ikti  yoga  will  engage  in  deeds  disgraceful  to  his  rank  in 
life,  will  not  be  skilled  in  work>  and  will  be  without  money 
and  comfort.    A  person  born  nnder  a  Danda   yoga  will  be 


lo2  BRinAT  JATAKA.  [OH.   H, 

sepamted  from  persons  of  his  affection  (a)  and  will  earn  his 
livelihood  by  the  lowest  of  ineaos^  viz.,  serritade. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  4 
more  Akriti  yogas. 

(a).     Sons  and  the  like. 

16.  A  person  born  under  a  Nan  yoga  will  be  of  wide- 
spread fame,  happy  only  now  and  then,  and  will^be  a  miser. 
A  person  born  under  a  Kuta  yoga  will  indulge  in  lies,  and 
will  be  a  jailor.  A  person  born  under  a  Chhatra  yoga  will 
make  his  people  happy  and  will  live  in  comfort  in  the  latter 
end  of  life  A  person  born  under  a  Chapa  yoga  will  delight 
in  fight  and  will  live  in  comfort  both  at  the  beginning  and 

end  of  life. 

Notes. 

The  effects  of  4  more  Akriti  yogas  are  described  in  this 
stanza. 

17*  A  person  born  under  an  Ardha-Chandra  yoga  will 
be  a  general  favorite^  of  agreeable  person  and  be  respected 
by  all.  A  person  born  under  a  ISamudra  yoga  will  be  as 
prosperous  as  a  king  and  will  live  in  comfort.  A  person 
born  under  a  Ghakra  yoga  will  have  his  feet  illumined  by 
the  lustre  of  the  gems  in  the  crowns  of  kings  falling  pros* 
trate  before  him  by  way  of  respect  and  submission  (a).  A 
person  born  in  a  Yallaki  yoga  will  be  skilled  in  work  and 
will  delight  in  music  and  dance. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  the 
three  Akriti  yogas  and  of  the  first  Sankhya  yoga. 

(a).  In  other  words  he  will  become  an  emperor  or 
king  of  kings. 

18.  A  person  born  under  a  Damini  yoga  will  be  liberal 
in  gift,  will  delight  in  helping  others  and  will  possess  many 
cows.    A  person  born  in  a  Pasa  yoga  will,  with  his  servants 


OH.  12.]  BBIHAT  JAtAKA.  133 

and  kinsmen,  Barn  wealtb  by  proper  means*  A  person  bom 
under  a  Kedara  yoga  will  till  lands,  and  by  doing  good  deeds^ 
will  be  useful  to  others.  A  person  born  under  a  Sula  yoga 
will  be  bold  in  fight,  will  receive  blows  and  will  be  fond  of 
money  (a)  but  will  be  poor. 

Notes. 
In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  l  more 
Sankhya  yogas. 

(a).  '^  Will  be  fond  of  torture  '*  according  to  some 
other  reading. 

19.  A  person  born  under  a  Yuga  yoga  will  be  poor  and 
will  act  in  contravention  of  Vf^dic  rules.  A  person  born 
under  a  Gola  yoga  will  be  poor,  dirty,  ignorant,  addicted  to 
low  deeds^  unskilled  in  work,  and  will  ever  he  wandering 
from  place  to  place  (a).  Thus  have  been  been  described 
the  several  Nabbasa  yogas  with  their  effects.  These  effects 
are  felt  throughout  a  man's  life. 

Notes. 
In  this  stanza  the  effects  of  the  remaining  two  Sankhya 
yogas  are  described. 

(a)'     For  bare  subsistence, according  to  commentator. 

(i).  Except  in  the  case  of  Vajra  and  other  yogas  (vide 
stanza  14)  whose  effects  will  be  felt,  as  stat^dyin  particular 
periods  of  a  personls  life.  So  that  where  ver  no  periods 
are  mentioned  the  effects  will  be  felt  throufrhont  life. 


Notes:— Dala  Yogas  will  coincide  neither  with  Asraya 
yogas  nor  with  Akriti  yogas.  They  might  coincide  with 
Sankhyayogas — with  the  Vallaki,  the  Damini,  the  Pasa,  or 
the  Kedara  yogas,  in  which  case  the  yogas  are  to  be  treated 
as  only  Dala  yogas  and  not  as  Sankhya  yogas.  iVide 
stanza  10).  Again,  according  to  stanza  1 2  if  the  Asiaya 
yogas  coincide  with  other  yogas,  they  cease  t(#   be  Asrwya 


^34  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [OH.    l2. 

• 

yogas  and  according  to  stanza  10  if  the  Sankhya  yogas 
eoincide  with  other  yogas,  they  oease  to  be^ Sankhya  yogas. 
Now  suppose  Asraya  and  Sankliya  3'ogas  to  coii^cide  with 
each  other.  Are  they  to  be  treated  as  the  former  or  as  the 
latter  ?  The  cominentaror  says  that  if  the  coincidtmce 
refers  to  the  Kedara,  Sula^  and  Yuga  yogas,  the  yogas  are 
to  be  treated  as  Asraya  yogas  only  ;  bub  if  it  refer  to  the 
Gola  yoga^  it  19  to  be  treated  as  suoh  and  not  as  an  Asrya 
yoga — otherwise  there  will  be  no  room  for  Qola  yoga  at  all* 

We  shall  now  explain  how  the  Yavanas  obtain  1800 
Nabhasa  yogas.  As  stated  in  stanza  S,  the  Yavanas  do  not 
treat  of  the  three  Asraya  yogas  and  the  two  Data  yogas. 
They  treat  of  23  Akriti  yogas  and  127  Sanl<hya  yogas  or 
IrO  yogas  in  all  for  a  Lagna  ;  there  being  12  Lagnas,  the 
number  of  Nabhasa  yogas  treated  of  by  the  Yavanas  is 
12X150=1800. 

^'e  shall  explain  these  more  fully.  As  explained  in 
note  (a)  to  stanza  4,  the  Gada  yoga  of  the  author  is  treated 
of  as  4  distinct  yogas  by  the  Yavanas.  Adding  these  to  the 
remain in<j^  19  Akriti  yogas^  we  get  23  Akriti  yogas  as 
treated  of  by  the  Yavanas. 

Again,  the  seven  Sankhya  yogas  of  the  author  are  split 
into  127  Sankhya  yogas  (for  a  Lagna)  by  the  Yavanas  as 
follows :  The  first  Sankhya  yoga  treated  of  by  Yaraha 
Mihira  is  known  as  Yallaki  yoga  auctirding  to  wliich  the 
7  planets  might  occupy  any  seven  signs.  This  may  be 
in  many  ways  ;  but  the  Yavanas  select  only  a  few  :  as  each 
of  the  seven  planets  might  ocoapy  the  Lagna  the  number 
of  yogas  under  this  division  is  7.  Again  the  2nd  Sankhya 
yoga  treated  of  by  the  author  is  one  according  to  which 
the  7  planets  are  said  to  occupy  any  six  signs.  This  may  be 
.  in  many  ways  j  but  the  Yuvana§  select  the  following  few  • 
of  the  7  planets  5  may  occupy  5  houses  and  two  more  may 


CH.    18.]  BBIHAT  JATJLTA.  J  35 

occupy  the  Lagna.  These  two  may  be  any  two  of  the 
6eveD  planets.  The  number  of  yogas  under  this  head  will 
be  the  number  of  combinations  of  7  things  taken  2 
together  =1x^=21. 

Again,  the  3rd  Sankhya  yoga  is  one  in  which  the  seven 
planets  occupy  5  houses.  This  may  be  in  many  ways  j  but 
the  following  are  selected: — 4  planets  occnpying  4  houses 
and  8  more  occupying  the  Lagna.  These  three  may  be 
any  three  out  of  the  7  planets-  The  number  of  cases 
under  this  head  is  the  number  of  combinations  of  7  things 
taken  3  together  =  J  X  1X^=35. 

The  next  Sankhya  yoga  of  Yaraha  Mihira  is  similarly 
split  by  the  Yavanas  into  ^  X|x<^x|t=r35^  and  the  next  into 
^XjX^Xjx^=  21,  and  the  next  into  JX^X^X^X  Jxf=7, 
and  the  last  into  jxJX^XjX|x|X|=l.  So  that  tlie  seven 
Sankhya  yogas  are  split  into  7  +  214-35  +  35421  +  7+1= 
127.  These  added  to  28  Akriti  yogas  give  us  150  yogas 
for  a  Lagna  or  1800  yogas  for  the  12  Laguas. 

To  find  the  number  of  combinations  of  n  things  taken 
r  at  a  time,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Lilavati  of  Bhas- 
kara  Charyar  or  to  the  Chhandas  Sutra  of  Pingala  or  to 
Chapter  77,  stanza  22  (notes)  of  the  English  Translation  of 
Brihat  Samhita  or  to  the  notes  to  stanza  4  of  the  next 
Chapter  of  this  Book. 


CHAPTER  Xlir. 
On  Chandra  (Lunar)  Yogas. 

1.  The  conduct^  wealth,  knowledge,  intelligence  and 
skill  of  a  person  will  be  poor,  moderate  or  excellent  accord- 
ing as  the  Moon  occupies  the  Kendra^  the  Panaphara  or 
the  Apoklima  houses  from  the  Sun  (a),  nnd  a  person  will  bo 
rich  and  will  live  in  comfort  if  the  Moon  occupy  his  own 
Navanisa   or   an    Atimitra   Navatnsa  (6),  providtd  she  is 

17 


186  BBIHIT  JATAKA.  [Olf.    18. 

aspected   by  Jupiter  if  the  birth   occur  by  day,  and  by 
Yenas  if  the  birth  occur  by  sight. 

Notes* 

(a).  At  the  time  of  birth.  In  other  words,  a  person 
will  have  very  little  of  these  qaalities  if  the  Moon  occupy 
either  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  the  4th,  7th  or  10th 
sign  from  it.  He  will  have  these  qualities  in  a  moderate 
degree  if  the  Moon  occapy  the  2nd,  SSth,  8th  or  11th  sign 
from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun ;  and  he  will  have  these 
qualities  in  a  large  measure,  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  8rd, 
6th,  9th  or  l2th  sign  from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun. 

(b).  An  Atimitra  Navarosa  is  a  Navamsa  of  an 
Atimitra  or  a  very  friendly  planet. 

2.  If  the  benefio  planets  (a)  occupy  the  6th,  7th  and 
8th  houses  from  the  Moon,  the  yoga  is  known  as  Adhi- 
yoga  (&).  A  person  born  in  the  yoga  will  become  a  gene- 
ral, a  minister  or  a  king  (c)  and  will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of 
great  pleasures  and  wealth  with  subdued  enemies  and  long 
life  and  free  from  diseases  and  fear, 

(a).    These  are  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Yenus. 

(b).  The  yoga  is  of  7  sorts  according  as  the  benefio 
planets  occupy  one  or  more  of  the  three  houses :  (1),  They 
might  occupy  all  the  three  houses  ;  (2),  or  the  6th  and  7th 
houses  \  (8)  or  the  6th  and  8th  ;  («)  the  7th  and  8th,  (5), 
the  6th  i  (6)  the  7th  j  (7),  the  8th  houses  from  the  Moon. 

(c).  According  as  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Yenus  are 
weak,  of  moderate  power,  or  of  very  great  power  according 
to  Badarayaua. 

In  the  Astrological  work  known  as  Saravali,  the  Adhi 
yoga  is  classed  with  Baja  yoga  when  the  planets  Mercury, 
Jupiter  and  Yenus  are  not  Astangata  plauets^  nor  aspected 
by  maletic  planets.     Mandavya  is  of  the  same  opinion. 


CH.    18.]  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  187 

3*  Excepting  the  San  if  the  other  planets  oocapy  the 
2Qd,  the  12th^  or  both  the  2nA  and  the  12th  houses  from 
the  Moon,  the  yoga  is  ,  respectively  known  as  Sunapha, 
Anapha  or  Daradhnra  ;  otherwise  (a),  the  yoga  is  known 
as  Kemadruma  by  nnmeroas  writers.  According  tf)  some  (b), 
if  the  Moon  occapy  the  Kendra  house  from  the  ascen- 
dant or  if  the  Moon  be  accompanied  by  a  planet,  the  yoga 
ceases  to  be  a  Kemadruma  yoga*  According  to  others  (c) 
the  three  yogas,  Sunapba,  Anapha  and  Durudhura  are  re- 
ferred to  the  Kendra  houses  from  the  Moon  ({2)>  while  again 
some  others  (0)  refer  the  three  yogas  to  the  houses  on  both 
sides  of  the  sign  the  Navamsa  of  which  the  Moon  occu- 
pies (/).  But  these  views  aro  not  considered  as  authori- 
tative. 

Notes. 

(a).  Otherwise :  t.  e.,  if  the  2nd,  the  12th,  or  both  the 
2nd  and  the  12th  houses  from  the  Moon  be  not  occupied  by 
planets — the  Sun  excepted. 

(b).     Garga  and  Parasara. 

(c).     Srutakeerti  and  others. 

(dy  That  is,  if  the  planets  excepting  the  Sun  occupy 
the  4th  house  from  the  Moon^  the  yoga  is  known  as  Suna- 
pha;  if  they  occupy  the  10th  house  from  the  MooUf  the 
yoga  is  known  as  Anapha,  and  if  they  occupy  both  the  4th 
and  the  10th  house  from  the  Moon^  it  is  known  as  Duru- 
dhura and  il  the  4th  and  10th  houses  fi*om  the  Moon  be  not 
occupied  by  planets,  the  yoga  is  known  an  Kemadruma. 

(e  ."  Jeevasarma. 

(/}.  Suppose  the  Moon  to  occupy  the  Navamsa  of 
Sagittari  in  sign  Aries.  Now  if  the  planets,  excepting 
the  Sun  and  the  Moon  occupy  the  2nd,  or  the  12th  or  both 
the  2bd  and  the  1 2th  houses  from  sign  Sagittari  the  yoga 
is  respectively  known  as  Sunapha,  Anapha  and  Durudhura. 


138  BKIUAT  JATAKl.  [OU.    18. 

but  if  tbeae  two  houses  bo  not  bo  occupied  the  yoga  is 
known  as  Konkadriima. 

4.  Tbe  Sunapha  and  the  Anapba  yogas  are  eaoli  of 
thirty-one  sorts,  and  the  Durudhura  yog}i8  are  of  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty  sorts,  as  will  be  found  to  be  the  case  by 
forming  series  as  described  in  the  rule  for  finding  the  num- 
ber of  coinbinatious  of  a  given  number  of  tbiuga. 

Notes. 

The  rule  for  finding  the  number  of  combinations  of  a 
given  number  of  things  is  only  hinted  at  in  the  text^  but 
not  fully  given.  It  is  quoted  in  stanza  22  of  Ghapter  79  of 
the  Brihat  Samhitts.     The  rule  is: — 

'^  Beginning  from  unity,  form  a  series  by  adding  to- 
gether the  first  fijgure  with  tbe  next  and  the  sum  with  the 
next  figure  and  so  on  omitting  only  the  last.  From  the 
series  thus  formed^  form  a  fresh  series  similarly,  beginning 
from  unity^  and  so  on.  The  last  terms  of  the  several  series 
will  give  the  number  of  combinations  required." 

Suppose  there  to  be  7  substances.  The  figures  1,  2,  3^ 
4,  b,  6f  7,  will  form  the  first  serBes.  Obtain  the  2nd  series 
as  follows:  1+2=3;  3+3=6;  6+4=10;  10+5=15; 
15  f  6=;21.  The  2nd  series  therefore  is  1,  3,  6,  10,  15,  21* 
Obtain  the  3rd  series  as  follows:  1+3=4;  4+6=10; 
10+10=20;  20+15=85.  Tbe  5rd  Peries  therefore  is  1,4,  U), 

20,  85.  Obtain  the  4th  series  as  follows  :  1+4=5;  5  +  10 
=15;  15+20=35.  The  4tb  series  therefore  is  1,5,15, 
35.     Obtain  the  5th  series  as  follows:  1+5=6.     6+15= 

21.  The  5th  series  therefore  is  1,  6>21.  Obtain  the  6'«h 
series  as  follows :  J^6=7.  The  6tb  series  therefore  is  1, 
7.  The  seven tb  series  is  ].  The  last  terms  of  tbo  seven 
series  are,  7,  21,  35,  36,  21,  7,  1.  These  are  respectively 
the  number  of  combinations  of  seven  things  taken  1,2,  3^ 
4,  5,  6  and  7  at  a  time.  Bhaskara  Ghariar  gives  a  simpler 
process  in  his  Lilavati-^a  work  on  Arithmetic.    Hes&ve* 


€H..  13.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA..  131^ 

Form  fractions  with  the  nnmber«  beginning  from  tbe 
last  number  to  unity  for  numerators  an^l  with  the  numbers 
beginning  from  unity  to  the  last  number  for  denominators 
respectively.  The  number  of  combinations  taken  1,  2, 
8,  4,  Ac,  at  a  time  will  respectively  be  the  first  fraction, 
the  product  of  1st  two  fractions,  of  the  first  three  fractions 
or  of  the  1st  foar  fractions,  &c.  Suppose,  for  instance,  the 
number  of  things  to  be  7.  Then  the  fructions  ars  Ji  h  4» 
T»  h  if  T-  The  namber  of  combinationB  of  7  things  taken 
one  at  a  time=J=7 ;  Taken  two  at  a  time=xXi=21,  taken 
3  at  a  time=^X  J  X^x  =35  ;  taken  4  at  a  time=ix4xix  J 
=35;  taken  5  at  a  time=ix  Jx4,x  Jxi=21 ;  taken  6  at  a 
time  =ixixjxjxjx|=7;    and     taken    7    at  a    time 

=Tx4xixfxJx*Xy=i. 

Now  in  the  Snnapha  or  Anapha  yogas  the  2nd  or  the 
12 th  house  from  the  Moon  may  be  occupied  by  the  five 
planets  from  Mars  either  singly  or  two  at  a  time  or  three  or 
four  or  all  at  a  time.  The  number  required  is  the  number 
of  combinations  of  five  things  taken  1,  2,  3, 4  and  5  together 
at  a  time.  This  is  to  be  deduced  from  the  following :  |,  |, 
hhi'  The  number  will  be  found  to  be  5+10-f  10+54-1 
=31. 

• 

Take  the  casein  which  the  2nd  house  from  the  Moon 
is  occupied  by  a  single  planet;  while  it  does  so,  the 
remaining  four  planets  may  occupy  the  12th  house  from  the 
Moon  1,  2,  3  and  4  at  a  time.  The  number  of  these  will  be 
the  sum  of  the  number  of  combinations  of  four  things 
taken  1,  2>  3  and  4  together.  This  will  be  found  to  be  4-r6 
H-4-f  1=15.  So  that  for  one  of  the  five  Suuapha  yogas  we 
pet  15  Dnrudhura  yogns.  The  five  Snnapha  yogas  of  one 
planet  will  therefore  give  iis  5x15=75  Durudhura  yog«s. 
Take  one  of  the  10  Sunapha  yogas  of  two  planers  from 
Mars  to  ?ttturn ;  the  remaining  3  planers  mny  occupy  the 
12th  hoube  from  the  Moou^  1^  2  and  3  at  u  time.     The  num- 


l-lO  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [OH.   13. 

ber  required  is  the  sum  of  the  number  of  oombinations  6t 
three  thing»  taken  I,  2  and  3  at  a  time.  This  will  be  found 
to  be  8 -f  8 +1=7.  Combining  these  with  the  10  Simapha 
jOfThB  of  2  planefcs  we  shall  get  10X7=^0  Duradhura yogas. 
Similarly  the  10  Sunapha  yogas  of  three  planets  will  give 
10x3=80  Duradhura  yogas;  and  the  fire  Snnapha  yogas 
of  4  planets  will  give  us  5x1=5  Durudhara  yogas.  So 
that  the  number  of  possible  Durudhura  yogas=75+70-|-?0 
+5=180, 

5.  A  person  born  in  a  Sunapha  yoga  will  be  possessed 
of  self-acquired  property^  will  be  a  king  or  will  resemble 
a  king,  and  will  be  a  man  of  intelligence,  wealth  and 
renown.' 

A  pci*son  born  in  an  Anapha  yoga  will  be  a  man  of 
influence  and  authority,  will  be  free  from  diseases,  will 
have  a  control  over  his  passions,  will  be  of  great  renowni 
will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  manner  of  pleasures,  wilil 
wear  neat  dress  and  will  be  free  from  grief. 

6.  A  person  born  in  a  Duradhura  yoga  will  be  in 
the  enjoyment  of  all  manner  of  pleasures,  will  be  possessed 
of  wealth  and  chariot,  will  be  liberal  in  his  gift*  and  will 
have  good  servants. 

A  person  born  in  a  Kemadrnma  yoga,  though  he  may 
belong  to  a  king's  family,  will  be  dirty,  afflicted  with  grief, 
will  do  deeds  not  suited  to  his  rank  in  life,  will  be  poor, 
will  serve  under  others  and  will  be  wicked. 

7*  If  the  yoga  planet  be  Mars,  the  person  will  be 
Active,  fond  of  fightt  and  wealthy,  and  will  engage  in 
deeds  without  thought.  If  the  yoga  planet  be  Mercury,  the 
person  will  be  skilled  in  work^  will  be  of  good  speech  and 
learned  in  the  arts  (a).     If  the  yoga  planet  be  Jupiter,  a 

person  will  be   wealthy  and  virtuous,  will  live  for  ever  in 
comfort  and  will  be  respected  by  the  king.    If  the  yoga 


CH.  18.1  .  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  141 

planet  be  Yenns,  a  person  will  be  afflicted  with  sexnal  pas- 
sion, will  be  very  wealthy  &nd  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  man- 
ner of  pleasures. 

Notes, 
(a).    In  music,  dance,  painting,  &c. 

8.  If  the  yoga  planet  be  Saturn,  a  person  will  enjoy 
the  wealth,  property  and  servants  of  others,  will  engage  in 
various  deeds  and  will  be  the  chief  of  parties  of  men  (a). 
It  the  birth  occur  by  day,  the  Moon  will  bring  on  misery 
if  she  occupy  the  visible  hemisphere,  and  will  bring  oix 
prosperity  if  she  occupy  the  invisible  hemisphere ;  if  other- 
wise,  the  results  will  be  the  reverse  of  these  (6); 

Notes. 

(a).  If  two  or  more  planets  be  yoga  planets  the 
effects  described  for  them  all  will  come  to  pass. 

(&).  That  is,  if  the  birth  occur  by  night,  the  Moon 
will  bring  on  misery  if  she  occupy  the  invisible  hemisphere 
and  prosperity  if  she  occupy  the  visible  hemisphere. 

9.  If  all  the  benefic  planets  (a)  occupy  the  TTpachaya 
places  (b)  from  the  ascendant  at  the  time  of  birth,  a  person 
will  be  very  rich  and  if  they  occupy  the  Upachaya  places 
from  the  Moon,  he  will  be  moderately  rich.  If  two  of  the 
planets  occupy  the  Upachaya  places  a  person  will  be 
moderately  wealthy  and  if  one  of  them  occupy  such  places 
he  will  possess  small  wealth  (c).  Even  if  the  person  be 
bom  in  other  malefic  Yogas  ((2)  the  present  yoga  will  take 
effect  to  their  exclusion  (e)* 

Notes. 

(a).    Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus. 

(&).  The  brd,  Gtli,  lOth  and  11th  houses  from  the 
ascendant. 

(e).  Or  poor.  If  benefic  planets  occupy  the  Upachaya 
places  both  from  the  ascendant  and  from  the  Moou  a  person 
will  be  exceedingly  rich. 


142  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [oH    14. 

(d).    Such  as  Kemadruma  yoga. 

(e).  That  is^  suppose  a  person  to  be  bom  in  a«Eenf)&-^ 
druina  yoga  and  suppose  the  benetic  plaueta  to  occupy  the 
Upachaya  places  from  the  ascendant  or  the  Moon  or  both, 
tlie  person  will  become  rich  and  not  poor. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

On  Double  Planetart  Yoqas. 

1.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  occu- 
py together  a  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  the  person  born  will  be  a 
maker  of  fire  engines  (a)  and  will  work  in  stones ;  if  the 
Sun  and  Mars  occupy  a  sign  together,  the  person  Jwill  be 
addicted  to  sinful  deeds;  if  the  Sun  and  Mercury  occupy  a 
sign  together^  the  person  will  be  skilled  in  work>  will  bo 
intelligent  and  famous^  and  will  live  in  comfort;  if  the  Sun 
and  Jupiter  occupy  a  sign  together,  the  peVson  will  be 
cruel  and  will  work  for  other  men  ;  if  the  Sun  and^Venus  oc- 
cupy a  sign  together  the  person  will  gain  money  by 
engaging  in  public  sports  and  by  the  use  of  weapons,  and  if 
the  Sun  and  Saturn  occupy  a  sign  together,  the  person 
will  be  skilled  in  metal  work  and  in  earthen-ware. 

Notes, 
(a).    Engines  of  destruction  according  to^Commentator. 

2.  If  the  double  planets^occupying  together  a  sign  of 
the  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be  the  Moon  and  Mars  the 
person  will  earn  money  by  the ,  sale  of  works  of  art,  of 
women,  of  liquor,  and  of  pots  and  will  give  trouble  to  his 
mother;  if  they  be  the  Moon  and  Mercury,  the  person  will 
be  of  sweet  speech,  skilled  in  literary  interpretation  and 
will  become  popular  and  famous ;  if  they  be  the  Moon  and 
Jupiter,  the  person  will  defeat  his  enemies,  |will  be  an  im- 
portant person  in  his  family,  will  not  be  of  firm  views  and 
will  be  greatly  rich;   if  they  be  the  Moon  and  Venus,  the 


cm.    14]  ilRIHAT  JAUkKki  l4  8 

person  will  be  Bkilled  in  cloth  work  (a) ;  if  they  be  the  Mooii 
and  Saturn^  the  person  will  be  the  son  of  a  re-marriecl 
woman  (5). 

Nottis. 

(a).  In  weaving^  stitching>  djeingi  buying  and  sellings 
cloths. 

(&).  Tiie  Sanscrit  term  for  the  woman  is  Ponarbhii. 
She  is  said  to  be  a  woman,  who,  out  of  sexual  passioOy 
(|uits  her  husband  and  marries  a  J3erson  of  her  oi^ii  castd 
whether  or  not  she  liaay  have  joined  in  sexual  union* 

3.  If  the  doable  planets  ciccapying  together  a  sign  of 
the  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be  Mars  and  Mercurjr,  the 
person  will  deal  in  roots  and  the  like,  in  oil,  in  works  of  art 
and  will  be  skilled  in  duels  ;  if  they  be  Mars  and  Jupiter, 
the  person  will  be  the  chief  of  a  town  oT  a  king,  will 
acquire  money  or  will  be  a  Brahmin  ;  if  they  be  Mars  and 
YenuSj  the  person  will  |)rotect  cows,  will  engage  in  dueld, 
will  be  skilled  in  work,  will  indulge  in  sexual  union  with 
the  wives  of  other  men  and  will  be  a  gambler ;  if  they  bei 
Mars  and  Saturn,  the  person  will  be  afflicted  with  grief > 
will  be  a  liar,  and  will  be  despised  by  otherd. 

4.-  If  the  double  planets  occnpjing  together  a  sign  of 
the  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be  Mercury  and  Jupiter,  the 
person  will  be  skilled  in  duels,  will  be  fond  of  music  and 
learned  in  dauce ;  if  they  be  Mercury  and  Venus  the  person 
will  be  one  of  good  speeoh,  and  will  be  a  ruler  over  countries 
and  over  men  >  if  tiiey  be  Mercury  and  Saturn,  the  person 
will  be  skilled  in  deceiving  other.^,  and  will  reject  the 
advico  of  his  preceptor ;  if  they  be  Jupiter  and  Venus,  the 
person  will  be  learned  in  some  respectable  department  of 
knowledge,  will  possess  wenlth,  a  wife  and  various  virtues  ; 
if  they  be  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  the  person  will  bo  a  barber, 
a  potman  or  a  cook. 

19 


14- 


3^. 


snigiiK:  fi£3:  fiC 


2rttK.«  ViVK 


1:  tM  T-QOft 

br  of  bn^k:  «rmi»iA^«w. 

vS).     Tbe  ;f^Ck  mkI  \U?^  te 


o; 


[«H.   I4r  8RIHAT  JATAKi«  145 

(4).  The  Sun  and  Jupiter,  fae  will  be  earnest  in  work, 
will  be  a  favorite  with  the  king  and  rich. 

(5).  The  Sun  and  Venus,  he  will  acquire  wealth 
through  women^  will  have  kinsmen  and  enemies  and  will  bo 
intelligent. 

(6).  The  Sun  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  of  dull  under- 
standing and  subject  to  his  enemies. 

(7)*  Moon  and  Mars,  he  will  be  bold  and  born  of  a 
high  family  j  will  be  virtuous,  wealthy  and  possessed  of 
good  qualities. 

(8).  Moon  and  Mercury,  he  will  be  charitable,  learned 
in  sciences,  and  possessed  of  excellent  qualities. 

(9).  Moon  and  Jupiter,  he  will  protect  good  and  pious 
men  and  will  be  very  intelligent. 

(10).  Moon  and  Venus,  he  will  be  a  sinner  and  a 
Merchant. 

(11).  Moon  and  Saturn,  he  will  possess  a  bad  wife^ 
will  ill-treat  his  father  and  will  be  poor. 

(13).  Mars  and  Mercary,  he  will  be  of  good  speech 
and  learned  in  medicine,  arts  and  sciences. 

(13).  Mars  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  of  strong  sexnal 
passion,  will  possess  excellent  qualities  and  will  be  a  mathe- 
matician. 

(14).  Mars  and  Venu9,  he  will  be  fond  of  fight  and  of 
the  world,  and  will  be  deceitful. 

(15).  Mars  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  litigious,  fond  of 
music  and  of  a  dull  understanding. 

(16).  Mercury  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  of  good  speech, 
beautiful  and  very  rich. 

(17).  Mercury  and  Venus,  he  will  be  a  ruler  over 
countries  and  over  men. 


H6  BillilAT  JATAKA.  [Cfl-  l4. 

(18).  Mercury  and  Saturn^  lie  will  bo  deceitfuljt  and 
will  not  be  open  to  the  advioe  of  his  preceptor. 

(19).  Jupiter  and  Venus,  he  will  be  of  bright  appear- 
ance, a  favorite  with  the  king,  will  be  very  intelligent  and 
fikilled  in  work. 

(20}.  Jupiter  and  Saturn^  ho  will  be  a  sculptor  ancl 
will  protect  cows. 

(21),     Venus  and  Saturn,  will  be  skilled  in  duels, 


II.— OP  THllEB  PLANETS. 

Again,  if  the  Yoga  planets  oconpying  a  single  sign  be 

(1).  The  Sun,  the  Moon  and  Mars— the  person  wi|l 
destroy  the  family  of  his  eoem}'',  will  be  rich  and  jusl;. 

(2).  The  Sun,  the  Moon  and  Mercury,  he  will  resemble 
^  king  and  will  be  learned  and  famous. 

(3).  The  Sun,  Moon  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  possessed 
of  many  good  qualities  and  will  be  learned. 

(4).  The  Sun,  Moon  and  Venus,  he  will  commit 
ad  ultery^  will  be  cruel,  will  be  subject  to  fear  from  his  enemy 
and  will  bo  rich. 

(5).  The  Sun,  Moon  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  a  man 
of  wrong  views,  will  be  deoeitful  and  will  travel  to  foreign 
lands. 

(6).  The  Sun,  Mars  and  Mercury — he  will  be  without 
enjoyment  of  any  kind  and  will  havo  sons,  wealth  and  wife. 

(7).  The  Sun,  Mars  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  fond  of 
sexual  enjoyment,  will  be  considerate,  will  be  a  commander 
of  armies  or  a  magistrate. 

(8).  The  Sun,  Mars  and  Venus,  he  will  be  afflicted 
with  diseases  of  the  eye,  will  live  in  comfort  and  born  in  Sk 
good  family. 


CB.   14.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA*'  147 

(9).    The  Sun,  Mars  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  separated  * 
from  his  kinsmen,  will  be  dumb,  will  suffer  from  diseases 
and  will  be  rich. 

(10).  The  Sun,  Mercury  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  of 
sound  views,  will  be  Iearned>  wealthy  and  famous. 

(ll).  The  Sun,  Mercury  and  Venus,  he  will  be  of 
soft  body*  will  be  learned  and  famous  and  will  live  in 
comfort. 

(12).  The  Sun,  Mercury  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  with- 
out kinsmen  and  poor  ;  will  hate  mankind  and  will  be  of 
vicious  habits. 

(18).  The  Sun,  Jupiter  and  Venus,  he  will  possess  a 
good  wife  and  children,  will  be  very  intelligent,  will  suffer 
from  diseases  of  the  eye  and  will  be  rich. 

(14).  The  Sun,  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  fearless, 
will  be  liked  by  the  king  and  will  be  of  quiet  and  excellent 
dispo0ition. 

(Id).  The  Sun,  Venus  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  of  bad 
reputation  and  will  be  haughty  and  insolent. 

(16).  The  Moon^  Mars  and  Mercury,  he  will  be  glut- 
tonous, will  be  addicted  to  wicked  deeds  and  will  abuse 
other  people. 

(17)'  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Jupiter,  he  will  bo  of 
angry  speech,  will  bo  of  strong  sexual  passion  and  will  bo 
beautiful. 

(18).  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Venus,  he  will  be  of  bad 
conduct,  will  have  no  sons  and  will  be  fond  of  travels. 

(19).  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  virtuous 
and  wealthy,  will  have  a  bad  wife  and  will  be  litigious. 

(20).  The  Moon,  Mercury  and  Jupiter — he  will  be 
charitable  and  learned  in  sciences,  will  protect  good  'and 
pious  men  and  will  be  of  good  speech. 


143  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [oH   14* 

(2^ ).  The  Moon,  Mercury  and  Venus— will  be  learned, 
will  be  addicted  to  low  deeds  and  will  have  numerous  ser- 
vants. 

(22).  The  Moon,  Mercury  andSaturn— will  be  liberal  in 
gift,  will  be  respected  by  the  king  and  will  be  possessed  of 
good  qnalities* 

(23).  The  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Venus-will  be  intelligent, 
will  have  good  sons  and  will  be  skilled  in  works  of  art* 

(24),  The  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Saturn-^-'will  be  learned 
in  sciences,  will  be  fond  of  old  women  and  will  be  as  happy 
as  a  king* 

(25).  The  Moon,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be  learned  in 
the  Vedas,  will  be  the  king's  chaplain  and  will  be  liked  by 
all  people. 

{26)*  MarSjMercury  and  Jupiter— will  be  fond  of  musiCi 
of  Vedas,  of  literature  and  of  drama* 

(27).  Mars,  Mercury  and  Venus— will  be  of  defective 
organs,  will  be  born  of  a  bad  family  and  will  be  of  settled 
views. 

(28).  Mars,  Mercury  and  Sutarn — will  serve  under 
other  men,  will  suffer  from  diseases  of  the  eye  and  will  be 
fond  of  travels. 

(29).  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Venus— will  be  liked  by  the 
king,  will  have  good  sons,  and  will  live  in  comfort. 

(30).  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn—will  be  of  thin  body, 
without  comfort,  respectable  and  given  up  to  a  vicious 
course  of  lifo. 

(31.)  Mars,  Venus  and  Saturn-will  have  bad  sons  and 
will  ever  be  of  pure  mind% 

32.  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  conquer  over 
his  enemies  and  will  be  of  wide-spread  fame. 


CH.  H.^  BRtHAT  JATAKA.  149 

83.    Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn— will  live  in  great 
comfort)  will  be  wealthy  and  will  be  attacbed  to  bis  wife* 

34.  Mercury^  Venus  and  Saturn— -will  tell  lies. 

35.  .  Jupiteri    Venus  and    Saturn — will  be  of  clear 
understanding  and  will  be  happy  and  famous. 


III.— OF  POUB  PLANETS. 

AgaiUi  if  the  yoga  planets  occupying  together  a  sign 
of  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be 

(I).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars  and  Mercury — the  person 
will  be  deceitful^  skilled  in  the  art  of  writing  and  will  suffer 
from  diseases. 

(2).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars  and  Jupiter — ^will  be  rich, 
famous,  intelligent  and  liked  by  the  king  and  will  be  free 
from  diseases  and  from  griefs 

(3).  The  San,  the  Moon/  Mars  and  Venus— will  have 
a  wife  and  children,  will  be  learned,  a  moderate  eater, 
happy,  skilled  in  work  and  merciful. 

(4).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars  and  Saturn— .will  suffer 
from  diseases  of  the  eye,  will  be  fond  of  travels  and  of 
prostitutes  and  will  be  poor. 

(6).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury  and  Jupiter— will  have 
eight  Bons,  will  be  rich  and  possessed  of  good  qualities ; 
will  be  famous,  powerful  and  liberal  in  gift. 

(6).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury  and  Venus— will  be  of 
defective  organs  and  of  good  speech. 

(7).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury  and  Saturn — will  be 
poor  and  ungrateful* 

(8).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  be 
possessed  of  many  good  qualities,  will  commit  adultery 
with  other  women,  will  be  intelligent  and  will  suffer  from 
diseases  of  the  eye. 


150  BitlHAT  JAJAKAt  [C}Ef.    Hi 

(9).  The  Ban,  Mood>  Jupifcer  and  Saturn — will  be 
fond  of  ii^ayels>  will  be  ricli»  intelligent  and  attached  to 
prostitutes. 

(10).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Venus  and  Saturn-^will  be  of 
defective  limbs,  will  be  timid^  will  follow  girls  and  will  be 
fond  of  wealth  and  meals. 

(11).  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Jupiter — will  be 
strong,  will  get  into  difficultiesj  will  be  married  and  rich, 
will  sufli'er  from  diseases  of  the  eye  and  will  be  fond  of 
travels. 

(12).  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Venus-^will  be 
fond  of  the  wives  of  other  men,  will  be  of  fearful  eyes  and 
appearance,  will  be  addicted  to  thieving  and  will  be  weak* 

(18).  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Saturn — ^will  be  a 
commander  of  armies  or  a  minister,  will  be  addicted  to  low 
deeds  and   will  bo  in  the  enjoyment  of  numerous  pleasures. 

(J 4).  The  Sun,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  be  as 
famous  as  the  king,  will  be  respected  everywhere  and  will 
be  rich. 

(15).  The  Sun,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn— w'.U  be 
blind,  will  be  a  wanderer  and  will  have  friends  and  kins- 
men. 

(16).  The  San,  Mars,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  suffer 
disgrace,  will  be  slothful  and  possessed  of  good  qualities. 

(l7).  The  Sun,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  be 
very  rich  and  famous. 

(18).  The  Sun,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — will 
bring  about  quarrels,  will  be  respectable  and  of  vicious 
habits. 

(19).  The  Sun,  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be 
of  good  speech,  will  be  truthfu!,  will  be  a  man  of  principle 
and  will  be  of  good  conduct. 


GH.    14.]  BRIHAT  J4TAKA.  J  51 

(20).  Tho  Sun,  Jupiter^^Veous  nnd  Saturn — will  be 
learned  in  arts,  will  be  the  chief  of  low  people  and  will  bo 
obstinate. 

(21).  The  Moon,  Mars^  Mercury  and  Jupiter — will  be 
liked  by  the  kin^>  will  be  a  minister  or  an  eminent  poet. 

(22).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Venus — will 
have  a  good  wife  and  sons,  will  be  intelligent,  will  be  ugly 
and  deformed  and  will  live  in  comfort. 

(23).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Saturn — ^will 
have  double  parents^  will  be  bold  and  will  have  several 
wives  and  childreu. 

(24).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  do 
sinful  deeds  will  indulge  in  sleep  and  will  be  fond  of  money. 

(25)*  The  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn^-^will  be 
of  firm  views,  bold,  happy  and  learned. 

(2G).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Venua  and  Saturn — will  be  of 
bad  conduct,  will  have  no  sons,  will  be  learned  in  llie 
Vedas  or  will  be  the  king'^  priest. 

(27).  The  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will 
be  very  rich,  attached  td  his  kinsmen  and  virtuous. 

(28).  The  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Satnm — will 
be  liberal  in  gifts,  will  be  respected  by  the  king  will  live  iu 
great  comfort,  will  be  wealthy  and  attached  to  his  wife. 

(29).  The  Moon,  Mercury,  Vlanus  and  Saturn — will  be 
hated  by  the  people  and  will  be  fond  of  the  wives  of  other 
men. 

(.30).  The  Moon,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be 
without  sons,  will  not  be  earnest  in  work  and  will  be 
without  mercy. 

(31).  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  be  rich 
and  despised  by  the  people 

20 


152  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.    l4 

(32).  Mars>  Meronry,  Jupiter  and  Saturn— will  suffer 
from  diseases  and  will  be  poor. 

(33).  MarSi  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn— will  be  of 
defective  limbs,  will  serve  under  other  men,  will  tell  lies 
and  will  bave  bad  sons. 

(34).  Mars^  Jupiter,  Venns  and  Saturn — will  be  lilced 
by  the  king,  will  be  of  thin  body,  will  have  bad  sons  and 
will  be  of  clear  understanding. 

(35).  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be 
very  rich^  learned,  and  of  good  conduct. 


IV.  OP  FIVE  PLANETS. 

Again,  if  the  yoga  planets  occupying  together  a  sign 
of  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be 

( I).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Mercnry  and  Jupiter — the 
person  will  engage  in  fight,  will  be  deceitful  and  skilled  in 
work. 

(2).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Venus — will 
be  devoid  of  charity,  will  be  earnest  in  work,  will  be  with- 
out kinsmen  and  will  work  for  other  men. 

(3).  >  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Saturn — will 
be  of  short  life,  will  be  fond  of  earning  money  and  without 
wife  and  children. 

(4).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will 
delight  in  annoying  other  men,  will  be  rejected  by  his 
parents  anb  kinsmen  and  will  be  of  defective  eyes. 

(6).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  gatum— will 
be  avaricious  and  will  be  afflicted  with  grief  owing  to  sepa- 
ration   from  his  wife. 

(6).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Venus  and  Saturn— will 
be  wealthy,  powerful,  able  and  dirty  and  will  covet  the 
wives  of  other  men. 


CH.  14.j  BBIHAT  JATAXA.  153 

(7>  The  San,  Mood#  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  VenaB— - 
will  be  a  ministerj  will  be  rich^  sacoessful,  famous  and 
powerful  and  will  also  be  a  magistrate. 

(8).  The  Sun,  Mood,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn- 
will  depend  on  other  men  for  meals^  will  be  timid,  will 
commit  sius  and  will  engage  in  fearful  deeds. 

(9).  The  Sun,  Moon^  Meroury,  Venus  and  Saturn- 
will  be  poor,  tall,  without  sons  and  sickly. 

(10).  The  Sun,  Moon,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  be  without  a  wife,  of  good  speech,  will  have  enemies 
will  be  fearless  and  learned  in  jugglery. 

(11),  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus — 
will  be  without  grief,  a  good  friend  and  master  of  horses 
and  covet  the  wives  of  other  men. 

(12).  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — 
will  beg  his  meals,  will  be  dirty  and  dressed  in  ragged 
clothes. 

(13).  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  be  an  important  person  aud  will  be  afflicted  with  grief, 
fear,  disease  and  hunger. 

(14),  The  Sun,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  be  respected  everywhere,  will  be  rich,  will  be  blind 
and  will  have  friends  and  kinsmen. 

^15).    The  Sun,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn- 
will  possess  a  knowledge  of  Atma,  will  do  deeds  acceptable    ' 
to   Devas    and   to  his  preceptors  aud  will  be  learned  in 
sciences. 

(16).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus 
— will  be  of  a  mild  disposition,  happy,  rich,  powerful  and 
learned. 

(17).    The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn 
— will  be  skilled  in  engineering,  will  be  of  strong  physique 
and  will  be  famous  for  his  skill  in  work. 


154  BRIHAT   JATAKA.  [CH.    l4 

(18)«  The  Moon,  Mars,  Morcury,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  have  a  good  wife  and  sonsj  will  be  intelligent  and  wi  11 
live  in  comfort. 

(19).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  work  for  other  men,  will  be  poor,  of  dirty  appearance, 
ignorant  and  addicted  to  thieving. 

(20).  The  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn 
—will  be  respected  in  all  lands,  will  be  of  defective  limbs, 
will  be  a  minister  and  will  resemble  a  king. 

(21).  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn-— 
will  be  respected  everywhere,  will  be  skilled  in  work,  will 
suffer  from  torture,   imprisonment  and  disease. 


v.— OF  SIX  PLANETS. 

Lastly,  if  the  yoga  planets  occupying  a  single  sign  of 
Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be  the  several  planets  except 

(1).  Saturn — the  person  will  be  a  writer  of  scientific 
works,  will  dwell  in  woods  and  mountains  and  will  be 
possessed  of  a  wife,  sons  and  wealth. 

(2).  Except  Venus — will  bo  addicted  to  thieving,  will 
covet  other  women,  will  be  despised  by  his  kinsmen,  will 
be  without  sous,  will  be  a  fool  and  will  travel  to  foreigu 
lands. 

(8).  Except  Jupiter — will  be  a  mm  of  low  birth,  will 
work  for  other  men,  will  suffer  from  consumption  and  will 
be  despised  by  the  people. 

(4).  Except  Mercury — will  be  a  minister,  will  be 
possessed  of  a  wife,  sons,  wealth  and  comfort  and  will  have 
a  control  over  his  passions. 

(5).  Except  Mars — will  suffer  from  headache,  will  be 
mad,  will  live  in  places  unfrequented  by  man  and  will 
travel  to  foreign  lands. 


CH.  15]'  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  156 

(6).     Except  the  Moon—- v^ill  be  an  eoergetic  traveller 
and  intelligent. 

(7).     Except  the  Sun — will  visit  holy 'places^  and  will 
be  rich. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

On  Ascetic  Yogas. 

1.  A  person  born  when  four  or  more  (a)  powerful  (b) 
planets  occupy  a  single  sign  of  the  Zodiac  becomes  an 
ascetic  of  the  Sakya,  Ajivika,  Bhikshuka,  Yridhasravaka^ 
Ohakra,  Nlrgrandha  or  Vanyasana  class  according  as  the 
most  powerful  planet  of  the  group  is  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter, 
the  Moon^  Venus,  Saturn  or  the  Sun.  (c)  If  such  powerful 
plauet  be  one  that  has  suffered  defeat  in  conjunction  at  the 
time  of  birth,  the  ascetic  will,  after  a  time  revert  to  his 
previous  condition  of  life. 

Notes. 

(a).     That  is  5, 6  or  7  planets. 

(6).  If  no  planet  be  powerful  there  will  be  no  Pravri- 
jia  (ascetic  yoga). 

(c)»  The  ascetic  life  of  the  most  powerful  plauet  will 
be  embraced  by  the  person  first,  then  that  of  the  planet  next 
in  power  and  so  on.  Tho  first  change  of  life  will  occur  in  tho 
Dasaand  Antardasa  period  of  the  most  powerful  plauet ;  the 
succeeding  changes  will  occur  in  the  Antardasa  periods  of 
the  respectivo  planets.  If  the  yoga  planet  be  a  single  power- 
ful planet  which  does  not  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction,  the 
ascetic  life  assumed  will  continue  till  death.  We  shall  now 
explain  the  terms  referring  to  the  several  classes  of  ascetics. 

(1).     Sakya : — A  Budhist  ascetic  dressed  in  red  robes. 

(2).  Ajtvika : — A  Jain  ascetic;  the  term  includes 
Vaishuava  ascetics  as  well. 


156  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [OU.   15. 

(S).  Bhikshu  : — A  Brahman  ascetic  \7ho  abandons  his 
house  and  family  and  subsists  entirely  on  alms. 

(4).  Yridhasravka  : — known  as  kapalikaj  &  follower 
of  Siva. 

(5).  Ghakra  :— known  as  Cbakradharaj  is  an  ascetic 
who  wears  a  discus. 

(6).     Nirgrandha  : — a  naked  ascetic. 

(7).  Yanyasana  : — an  ascetic  who  subsists  on  the  roots 
of  the  forest  and  is  engaged  in  Divine  meditation. 

2.  If  the  most  powerful  yoga  planet  be  an  Astangata 
planet,  (a)  a  person  will  not  become  a  Deekshita  (b)  but  will 
be  attached  to  persons  who  are  such.  Again,  if  the  power- 
ful planet  which  suffers  defeat  in  conjunction  be  aspected 
by  other  planets^  a  person  will  not  become  a  Deekshita  (c) 
but  will  possess  a  strong  desire  to  become  one. 

Notes. 
(ay    This  has  already  been  explained. 

(6).     That.iSj  one  of  the  holy  order  of  men. 

(c).  If  not  aspected^  he  will  become  one,  and  after  a 
time  revert  to  his  former  condition  of  life  as  stated  in  the 
last  stauza. 

3;  If  the  lord  of  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  as- 
pects Saturn  and  be  not  aspected  by  any  other  planet^  (a) 
or  if  Saturn  aspect  the  lord  of  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
when  such  lord  is  not  powerful,  (b)  a  person  will  become  an 
ascetic.  Again,  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  Drekkaua  of  Saturn 
and  the  Navamsa  of  Saturn  or  Mars  and  be  aspected  by 
Saturoj  (c)  a  person  will  become  an  ascetic  ((2)« 

Notes. 

(a).    The  Pravrijia  will  be  that  of  such  lord  or  Saturn 
whichever  is  powerful. 


'4 


CH.   16.]  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  167 

(b).    The  Pravrijia  ^ill  be  that  of  Saturn. 

(e>     And  not  aspected  by  any  other  planefc. 

(dy    The  ascetic  life  will  be  thab  described  for  Saturn. 

4.  A  person  born  when  Jupiter,  the  Moon  and  the 
rising  sign  are  aspeoted  by  Saturn^  when  Jupiter  occupies 
the  9th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  under  one  of  the 
Baja  yogas  becomes  a  scientiBo  author,  (a).  Again,  a 
person  bom  when  Saturn  occupies  the  9th  house  from  the 
ascendant  and  is  not  aspected  by  other  planets  and  under  a 
Raja  yoga  will  become  both  a  king  and  an  ascetic*  (&). 

Notes. 

(a).  If  the  horoscope  contain  a  Raja  yoga  and  an 
ascetic  yoga,  the  former  will  not  take  effect,  but  the  latter 
will;  such  for  instance  as  the  lives  of  Yaraha  Mihii a^  Eanadai 
Budha^  Panchasikha,  Brahma  Gupta  and  others.  If  the  horos- 
cope contain  two  Uaja  yogas  and  an  ascetic  yoga,  the  person 
will  become  a  king — such  as  Janaka,  Kasiraja,  Suchidhwaja 
and  others. 

(b).  If  the  horoscope  contain  no  Raja  yogas  but  only 
the  ascetic  yoga  described  in  the  tezt^  the  person  will  be< 
come  an  ascetic. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 
Oh  Thb  Kaeshatbas. 

OB 

•  _ 

The  Moon  In  The  Asterisms. 

1.    A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Aswini  will  be  fond  of  ornaments,  will  be  of 
/       fine  appearance,  will  be  popular,  skilled  in  work  and  intelli- 
gent. 


'!> 


158  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [OH.    16. 

A  person  bom  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
i  -'^  asterism  of  Bharani  will  be  sucoessfulat  work>  trnthfal^  free 
from  diseases^  able  and  free  from  grief. 

2.  A  person  born  when  the  .  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Krittika  will  bo  a  glutton,  fond  of  the  wives  of 
other  men,  of  bright  appearance  and  of  wide-spread  fame. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Rohini  will  be  truthful,  will  not  covet  the  property 
\Jk         of  other  men^  will  be  of  cleanly  habits,  of  sweet  speech^  of 
firm  viewsj  and  of  find  appearance. 

8.     A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
jt        asterism  of    Mrigasirsha  will  be  of  no  firm  principles,  will 
.0         be  able,  timid^  of  good  speech^  of  active  habits^  rich  and 
will  indulge  in  sexual  pleasures. 

A  person  born  when   the  Moon  passes  through  the 
{  asterism  of   Ardra  will  be  insincere^  of  irascible  temper^ 

ungrateful,  troablesome  and  addicted  to  wicked  deeds. 

4.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Punarvasu  will  be  devout  and  of  patient  habits 

^,         will  live  in  comfortj  will  be  good-natured^  quietj  of  wrong 
YiewSj  sickly,  thirsty  and  pleased  with  trifles. 

5.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Pushya  will  have  a  control  over  his  desires,  will 
be  generally  liked^  learned  in  the  SastraSj  rich  and  will  b^ 
found  of  acts  of  charity. 

A  person   bom  when  the   Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Aslesha  will  not  be  attentive   to  the  work  of 
'  ^-^^       other  men,  will  be  a  promiscuous  eater^  will  be  sinful^  un- 
grateful and  skilled  in  cheating  other  men. 

6.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Magha  will  have    numerous    servants^  will  wor- 

\0     ship  the  Devas  and  Pitris  and  will  be  engaged  in  important 
works. 


% 


17" 


CH.    1G  ]  BRIBAT  JATAKA»  }tj9 

A  person  born  wLen  the  '  Moon  passes  ihronprh  the  as- 

I  *        terism  of  P.  Plialgnni  will  be  of  sweet  speech^  will  be  liberal 

in  his  gifts,  of  wandering  habits  and  will  serve  under  kings* 

7.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
aaterisra  of  U.  Phalguui  will  be  generally  liked,  will  earn 
money  by  his  learning  and  will  live  in  comfort, 

A  pewon  born   when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  ns- 
terism  of  Hasta  will  be  of  active  habits,  fall  of  resoarces, 
\Ji     shameless,  merciless  and  a  thief  and  a  drunkard. 

8.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Chittra  will  wear  cloths  and  flowers  of  various 

I  \A    colors  and  will  have  beautiful  eyes  and  limbs. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through    tlie 
asterism  of  Swati  will  be  of  a  mild  and  quiet  nature^  will 
\ij     control  his  passion^  will  be   skilled  in  trade,  will  be  merci- 
ful^ unable  to  bear  thirsty  of  sweet  speech  and  disposed  to 
do  acts  of  charity. 

0.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Visakha  will  be  jealous  of  another's  prosperity, 
will  be  a  nigisrard,  of  bright  appearance,  of  distinct  speech, 
skilled  in  earning  money  and  disposed  to  bring  about  quar- 
rels among  men. 

A  person  born    when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Anuradha  will  be  rich,  will  live  in  foreign  lands, 
^j  .^    will  be  unable  to  bear  hunger  and  disposed  to  wander  from 
/     place  to  place. 

10.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Jyeshta  will  li.ive  few  friends,  will  be  very 
cheerful,  virtuous,  and  of  irascible  temper. 


!^ 


Ig 


A  person  born   when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Moola  will  be   haughty,  rich,  happy,  not  disposed 
/  ^     to  injure  other  men,  of  firm  views  and  will  live  in  luxury. 

21 


i^ 


IGO  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.    16. 

11.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  pnssea  through  the 
i-  wv  (\      Hsteriam  of  P.  Ashadha  will  have  an  agreeable  wife,  will  be 

proud  and  attached  to  friends. 

A  person  born  when   the  Moon  passes  through    the 

ns'terisni  of  U.  Ashadha  will  be  obedient,  will  be  learned  in 

*^,  i       the  rules  of  vir;u3,  will  posses  many  friends,  will  be  gmte- 

ful  and  return   favors  received  and  will  be  generally  liked. 

12.  A  person   born  when  the  Moon  pusses    through 
the  astorism  of  Sravana  will  be  pi*osperou8  and  learned, 

*)»  ''*      will  have  a  liberal-minded  wife,  will  be  rich  and  of  wide- 
spread fame. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
,  «g.  terism  of  Dhanishta  will  be  liberal  in  gifcs,  rich^  valient^ 
^  fond  of  music  and  will  be  a  niggard. 

13.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterisin  of  Safcabhishak  will  be  hnrsh  in  his  speech,  will  be 

j\\K  truthful  will  suflfer  grief  will  conquer  his  enemies,  will 
though tlobsly  engage  in  work  and  will  be  of  independent 
ways. 

A  person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 

terism  of  P.    Bhadrapada  will  suffer  from  grief^  will  plaee 

J     his   wealth  at  the   disposal  of  his  wife,  will  be  of  distinct 

'^        speech,  will   be   skilled   iu  earning  money  and   will  be  a 

niggard. 

14.  A   person  born   when    the  Moon  passes  through 
the  Hsterism  of  U.  Bhadrapa<la  will  be  an  able  speaker,  will 

\t'V'      be  hnppy,  will  possess  children  and  grand-children  will  con- 
quer his  enemies  and  will  be  virtuous. 

A  person  born   when    the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
^     terism  of  Revati  will  possess  perfect  limbs,  will  be  liked  by 
'^^•y  y   all  the  people,  will  be  deeply  learned,  will  never  covet  the 
property  of  other  men  and  will  be  rich. 


CH.    17.]  BBIHAT  JATAKAJ  ICl 

Motes. 
Tho  eflTocta  desnribod  above   "will  full}'  come  to   passf 
only  if  the  Moou  be  powerful. 


CHAl^TBR  XVII. 
On  Tuk  Moon  In  Tub  Sevbral  Signs  of 

Thk  Zodiac. 

1.  A  person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Aries  will 
have  ronnd  red-eyes,  will  be  fond  of  vegetable  food  aud 
will  eat  hot  meals  but  in  a  moderate  degree  -,  will  be  of  a 
quickly  relenting  nature,  will  be  fond  of  travels  atid  of 
Boxual  union;  will  be  of  strong  knees;  will  possess  no 
permanent  wealth;  will  be  fond  of  fight  and  of  women; 
will  be  Tskilled  in  befriendinor  other  men:  will  have  di.s- 
figured  nails  and  a  wounded  head  ;  will  be  hnughty^  will  be 
the  eldest  of  his  brothers;  will  have  lines  in  his  hand  of 
the  shape  of  the  weapon  known  as  Saldi ;  will  be  fickle-inin-* 
ded  and  will  be  afraid  of  water. 

2.  A  person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Tdurus  will 
be  of  fine  appearance  and  of  beautiful  gait;  will  possess 
large  thighs  and  face  ;  will  possess  marks  on  his  hack,  face 
and  sides,  will  be  liberal  iu  Lis  gifts  ;  will  bear  misfortaues; 
will  possess  great  influeoce  and  authority ;  will  have  a 
large  hump  on  the  neck  ;  will  have  daughters;  will  suffer 
from  phlegmatic  afFecbions,  will  be  sepurated  from,  his 
kinsmen^  wealth  and  sons ;  will  be  of  agreeable  manners 
and  of  patient  nature;  will  be  a  great  eater;  will  be  fond 
of  women;  will  be  attached  to  his  friends  and  will  be  hap- 
py both  when  young  and  old. 

3.  person  born  with  tho  Moon  in  sign  Gemini  will  be 
fond  of  women,  will  be  skilled  in  sexual  union  ;will  possess 


162  BniiiAT  jataka.  [cu.  17» 

red  eyes;  will  be  learoed  ia  the  Sastras;  will  carry  messages; 
will  possess  curling  hairs  and  a  sharp  intellect;  will  be  skill* 
ed  in  wi^^  in  discovering  the  thoughts  of  other  men  and  in 
game;  will  possess  beautiful  features;  will  be  of  sweet  speech; 
will  be  a  great  eater;  will  be  fond  of  musio>  and  skilled  in 
the  rules  of  dance;  will  join  in  sexual  union  with  herma- 
phrodites; and  will  possess  an  elevated  nose. 

4.  A  person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Cancer  will 
possess  a  bent  body  ;  will  walk  fast ;  will  have  a  high  hip  ; 
will  be  subject  to  the  influence  if  woiuon ;  will  have  an 
excellent  friend  ;  will  be  learned  in  Astrology  ;  will  have 
numerous  houses^  will  have  a  wealth  which  will  increase 
and  decrease  as  the  Moon  ;  will  be  short  >  will  possess  a 
thick  neck ;  will  be  capable  of  being  won  over  by  kind 
words^  will  be  attached  to  his  friends  and  will  bo  fond  of 
water  and  forests* 

5,  A  person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Leo  will  be 
of  irascible  temper^  of  large  cheeks,  broad  face  and  brown 
eyes;  will  have  very  few  sons  ;  will  hate  women;  will  bo 
fond  of  animal  food^  forests  and  hills ;  will  continne  angry 
at  trifles  for  a  long  time ;  will  bo  afllicted  with  pains  caused 
by  hunger,  thirst,  belly-ache,  tooth-ache  as  well  as  purely 
mental  anxieties  ;  will  be  liberal  in  his  gifts  ;  will  be  bold 
in  fight ;  will  be  of  fixed  principles ;  will  be  haughty  and 
attached  to  his  mother. 

6.  A  person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Virgo  will,ont 
of  modesty,  be  of  mild  and  beautiful  eyes  and  gait;  will  have 
his  shoulders  and  arms  sunk  or  depressed;  will  live  in  com- 
fort, will  be  of  soft  body  ;  will  be  truthful,  will  bo  skilled  in 
dance,  music  and  painting;  will  be  learned  in  the  Sastras; 
will  bo  viituous  and  intelligent,  will  be  fond  of  sexual  union; 
will  enjoy  the  house  and  property  of  other  men;  will  live 
in  foreign  lands;  will  be  of  sweet  speech;  and  will  hava 
daughters  and  very  few  sons. 


CH.  17.]  DRIHAT  JATAKA.  1G5 

7.  A  person  born  with  thoMoon  in  sign  Libra  will  rea- 
pocb  t.ho  Devas,  Brahmins^  and  holy  men  ;  will  bo  latelligenfc^ 
will  never  covet  the  property  of  other  men;  will  lead  a  reli- 
gious life;  will  be  subject  to  the  influence  of  women  ;  will  }»e 
tall ;  will  have  a  raise«l  nose  ;  will  be  of  thin  «ud  defective 
Mmbs  and  fond  of  travels;  will  be  rich;  will  be  ti  trader ; 
will  bear  the  name  of  a  Deva  ct)upled  with  an  exo<*llent  sur- 
name granted  by  a  body  of  learned  men  ;  will  bo  sickly  ; 
will  protect  his  family  and  will  be  disgraced  and  rejected 
by  his  kinsmen. 

8.  A  person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Scorpio  will 
have  broad  eyes^  a  broad  breast  and  round  shanks^  thicrlis 
and  knees;  will  be  separated  from  his  parents  and  preceptors; 
will  be  afflicted  with  disoagos  when  young;  will  bo  respected 
by  kings,  will  of  brown  color;  will  not  be  of  a  straight- 
forward nature  ;  will  have  lines  in  his  hand  and  feet  of  the 
shape  of  the  fish,  the  Vajrayudha  or  a  bird  ;  and  will  end- 
eavor to  conceal  his  sins. 

9.  A  person  born  with  tho  Moon  in  sign  Sngittari 
will  have  a  long  face  and  neck ;  will  inherit  his  father^s 
property;  will  be  liberal  in  his  gift;  will  be  a  literary 
author ;  will  be  powerful  and  skilled  iu  speech  ;  will  have 
large  teeth,  ears,  lips  and  nose,  will  engage  in  numerous 
works ;  will  be  skilled  in  sculpture;  will  have  indistinct 
shoulders,  disfigured  nails  and  large  hands;  will  be  of  a 
deep  and  inventive  intellect,  will  be  a  man  of  right  under- 
standing ;  will  hate  his  kinsmen  ;  will  never  yield  to  compul- 
sion but  only  to  kind  treatment. 

• 

10.  A  porson  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Capriconi 
will  be  ever  attached  to  his  wife  and  children  ;  will  do 
deeds  of  virtue;  will  have  thin  lower  limbs,  good  eyes  and 
a  thin  waist;  will  be  open  to  advice;  will  be  of  amiable 
manners  and  slow  at  work  ;  will  not  bear  cold  -,  will  be  of  a 


164  .  BT^IHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.   17 

wandering  nature,  powerful  and  a  literary  author ;  will  be  a 
niggard  and  will  be  attached  to  old  women  of  low  caste  ; 
will  be  Bbameless  and  merciless. 

11.  A  person  born  with  tho  Moon  in  sign  Aquarius 
will  have  a  neck  like  that  of  the  Camol^  a  bod}'  covered  with 
muscles,  rough  and  covered  with  hair;  will  be  tall;  will 
have  large  legs,  thighs^  back,  buttocks,  face>  and  lower 
belly;  will  be  deaf;  will  be  attached  to  the  wives  of  other 
men  and  interested  in  the  wicked  deeds  of  other  people  ; 
will  rise  and  fall  by  turns  ;  will  de  fond  of  flowers  aud  per- 
fumes; and  will  be  attached  to  friends  aud  will  walk  with- 
out fealing  tired. 

12.  A  person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Pisces  will 
be  a  dealer  in  the  produce  of  the  sea  and  a  trader  in  general ; 
will  be  fond  of  his  wife  aud  clothes ;  will  have  perfect 
limbs,  a  bright  body,  long  nose  and  large  head,  will  put  his 
enemies  into  disgrace^  will  be  subject  to  the  influence  of 
women>  will  have  beautiful  eyes>  and  will  be  fair,  rich,  happy 
and  learned. 

13.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  Moon,  tho 
sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  and  the  lord  of  such  sign  be  all 
powerful  the  eflects  described  in  this  chapter  will  fully  coma 
to  pass  (a)  ;  the  same  remark  applies  to  planets  other  than 
the  Moon  (b). 

Notes. 

(a).  If  two  of  the  three  be  powerful,  the  eflfects  will 
como  to  pass  imperfectly  ;  if  only  one  of  the  three  bo  power- 
ful, they  will  coine  to  pass  still  more  imperfectly  and  if 
none  of  the  three  be  powerful,  the  effects  will  fail. 

(6).  This  refers  to  the  next  chapter  in  which  the 
author  describes  the  eifects  of  the  various  planets  occupy- 
ing the  several  signs  of  zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth. 


OH.  18*]  BEIHAT  JATAKA.  165 

CHAPTER  XVIir. 

On  Tbs  Sun,  Mars  And  {Othbr)Planbts 

Iq  tlie  Several  Signs  of  ZndiHO. 

1.  A  person  born  with  the  Snn  in  Aries  but  not  in  its 
exaUation  degree  (a)  will  be  of  wide-spread  fame^  able,  of 
wandering  habits,  possessed  of  small  wealth  and  will  carry 
weapons. 

A  person  born  with  the  Sun  in  ,.sign  Taurus  will  deal 
in  clothsy  perfumes  and  other  articles,  will  hate  women  and 
will  be  skilled  in  music 

Notes. 

(a).  A  person  bom  with  the  Snn  in  the  exaltation 
degree  will  be  very  rich,  will  remain  for  ever  in  a  place,  will 
have  servants  carrying  arms^  will  be  of  great  fame  and  able. 

2.  A  person  born  with  the  Sun,  in  sign  Gemini  will 
be  learned  iu  grammar^  will  be  an  Astrologer  and  will  be 
rich. 

A  person  born  with  the  Sun  in  Cancer  will  be  independ- 
ent, fierce,  poor,  will  do  the  work  of  other  people  and  will 
Buflfer  from  the  fatigue  of  foot-journey. 

A  person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Leo  will  be  fond 
of  living  in  forests,  mountains  and  cow-sheds,  will  be 
powerful  and  will  be  a  fool. 

A  person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Virgo  will  be  skill- 
ed in  writing,  painting,  in  literar}'  productions  and  in  mathe- 
matics, and  will  possess  a  body  resembling  that  of  a  woman. 

3.  A  person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Libra  will  be 
fond  of  liquor  or  will  manufacture  it^  will  be  of  a  wandering 
nature,  will  be  an  alchemist  and  will  do  wicked  deeds. 

A  person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Scorpio  will  be  of 
a  fierce  nature,  will  thoughtlessly  engage  in  work^  will  earn 
money  by  nets  connected  with  poison  and  will  be  vastly 
learned  in  the  use  of  arms. 


106  BUIHAT   JATAKA.-  [CH.    13. 

A  person  born  with  the  Sun  in  Sagitiari  will  be  reepec- 
tftd  by  sages,  will  be  rich  and  independent  and  will  be 
lournod  in  medicine  and  sculpture. 

A  person  born  with  the  Sua  in  sign  Capricorn  wiU 
engage  in  deeds  unsuited  to  his  rank  in  life,  will  be  igno- 
rant, will  deal  in  mean  articles,  will  possess  small  wealth, 
will  be  avaricious  and  will  epjoy  the  property  of  other  men* 

A  person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Aquarius  will 
engAge  in  deeds  unsuited  to  his  rank  in  life,  will  be  poor 
and  will  have  no  sous. 

A  porsn  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Pisoes  will  become 
rich  by  dealing  in  the  produce  of  water)  will  bo  respected 
by  women^  will  possess  a  mole  or  other  marks  in  the  part 
of  body  coiTesponding  to  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun  and 
Moon  together. 

5.  A  person  born  witho  Mars  in  sign  Aries  or  Scorpio 
will  be  respected  by  the  king,will  bo  of  a  wandering  nature> 
will  be  a  commander  of  armies  or  a  trader,  will  be  rich,  will 
have  a  body  marked  with  wounds,  will  be  a  thief  and  will 
be  in  iho  enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  of    the  senses. 

A  pt^rson  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Taurus  or  Libra  will 
be  snbji^ct  to  the  influence  of  women,  will  not  be  open  to 
the  advice  of  friends,  will  bo  fond  of  the  wives  of  other  men, 
will  be  learned  in  the  games  of  magic,  will  adorn  his  per- 
son, will  bo  of  a  timid  nature  and  will   have  a  rough  body. 

0.  A  person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Gemini  or  Virgo 
will  bo  of  bright  appearance,  will  have  sons  and  no  friends, 
will  help  others,  will  bo  skilled  in  music  and  tight,  will  bo 
a  niggard,  and  will  be  fearless  and  of  a  begging  nature. 

A  person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Cancer  will  be  )  ich, 
will  cross  sOiis  and  eara  woallh,  will  bo  of  defective  limbs 
and  will  be  wicked- 


OH.  18.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  167 

7.  A  person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Leo'will  be  poor, 
will  patiently  bear  afflictions^  will  wander  in  the  forests, 
will  be  fearless  and  will  have  few  wives  and  children. 

A  person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Sagittari  or  Pisces 
will  have  many  enemies^  will  be  the^king's  minister^  will  be 
of  wide-spread  fame>  will  be  fearless  and  will  have  very  few 
children. 

A  person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Aquarius  will  ever 
sufifer  grief^  will  be  poor,  will  wander  from  place  to  plHce^ 
will  be  a  liar^  will  be  independent  and  wicked. 

A  person'  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Capricorn  will  be 
verj  rich^  will  have  manjr  sons  and  will  be  a  king  or  will 
resemble  a  king. 

8.  A  person  bom  with  Mercury  in  sign  Aries  or 
Scorpio  will  be  fond  of  gamblings  of  running  into  debt  and 
of  liquor;  will  be  an  atheist,  will  argue  against  the  spirit 
of  the  S  istras^  will  be  a  thief>  will  be  pooo  will  have  a 
mean  wife,  will  be  deceitf ul|  will  be  a  liar  and  w[ill  swerve 
from  the  path  of  rectitude. 

A  person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Taurus  or  Libra 
will  be  a  preacher^  will  have  many  sons  and  wives,  will 
ever  be  engaged  in  earning  money >  will  be  liberal  in  f^ift 
and  will  respect  his  preceptor* 

9*  A  person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Qemini  will 
be  talkative,  will  be  a  liar  will  be  learned  in  the  sciences, 
inmusic>  in  dance  and  iu  painting;  will  be  of  sweet  speech 
and  will  live  in  comfort. 

A  person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Cancer  will  earn 
money  by  works  connected  with'  water  and  will  be  disliked 
by  his  kinlimen. 

10.  A  person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Leo  will  be 
disliked  by  women,  will  be  poor,  will  have  neither  comfort 
nor  sons,  will  wandeir  from  place  to  place,  will  be  ignorant, 
will  be  fond  of  women  and  will  sufEer  disgrace. 

22 


18S  UUVAT  JATAKA.  [OB.   18. 

A  person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Virgo  will  be 
liberal  in  giftj  will  be  learned^  will  possess  many  virtues^ 
will  live  in  comfort^  will  be  of  a  patient  nature^  will  be 
ingenious  !and  fearless. 

11.  A  person  bom  with  Mercury  in  sign  Capricorn 
or  Aquarius  will  work  for  other  men^  will  be  poor,  will  be 
a  sculptor,  will  run  into  debts  and  will  work  for  no  fees. 

A  person  born  with  Mercury  in  sigh  8agittari  will  be 
respected  by  kings,  will  be  learned  in  sciences  and  in  laws. 

A  person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Pisces  will  be 
skilled  in  befriending  other  men,  will  readily  discover  the 
views  of  other  people^  and  will  be  learned  in  the  handicraft 
of  men  of  low  castes. 

12*  A  person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Aries  or 
Scorpio  will  be  a  commancler  of  armies^  will  be  very  rich, 
will  have  many  wives  and  children,  will  be  liberal  in  gift« 
will  have  good  servants^  will  be  of  a  patient  nature,  and  of 
bright  ^appearance,  will  be  happy  with  his  wife  and  will  be 

of  great  fame. 

A  person  born  with  Jupiter  in  isign  Taurus  or  Libra 
will  be  free  from  diseases,  will  live  in  comfort^  will  be  rich, 
will  have  friends  and  sods,  will  be  liberal  in  gift  and  will 
be  liked  by  all. 

A  peraon  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Gemini  or  Yirgo 
will  have  many  clothes,  houses,  servants,  sons  and  friends, 
will  be  a  minister  and  will  live  in  comfort. 

IS.  A  person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Cancer  will  be 
possessed  of  gems,  sons,  wealth,  wives,  influenccj  intelligence 
and  oomfort- 

A  person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Leo  will  be  all  that 
has  been  said  in  the  case  of  a  person  born  with  Jupiter  in 
Cancer  and  will  besides  be  a  commander  of  armies. 


(m.   18.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  169 

A  person  born  with  Jnpiter  in  sign  Bagittari  or  PiscM 
will  be  tbe  ruler  of  a  province  or  a  minister  under  a  king 
or  the  commander  of  armies  or  will  be  very  rich. 

A  person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Aquarius  will  be  all 
that*  has  been  said  in  the  case  of  a  person  born  with  the 
Moon  in  sign  Cancer. 

A  person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Capricorn  will  do 
deeds  disgraceful  to  his  rank  in  life,  will  possess  very  little 
wealth  and  will  be  afflioted  with  grief. 

14.  A  person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Aries  or 
Scorpio  will  be  fond  of  the  wives  of  other  men,  will  lose  his 
property  through  their  influenoe  and  will  bring  disgrace  on 
his  family. 

A  person  born  with  Yenus  in  sign  Taurus  or  Libra  will 
acquire  wealth  by  his  own  powers,  will  be  liked  by  the 
king,  will  be  an  important  person  among  his  kinsmen,  will 
be  a  man  of  fame  and  will  be  fearless. 

16.  Apersonborn  with  Yenus  in  sign  Gemini  will  do 
the  work  of  a  king,  will   be  rich  and  learned  in  music* 

A  person  born  with  Yenus  in  sign  Yirgo^  will  engage 
in  hard  work. 

A  person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Capricorn  or  Aqu- 
rius  will  be  liked  by  all,  will  be  subject  to  the  influence  of 
women  and  will  be  fond  of  bad  women. 

16.  A  person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Cancer  will  have 
two  wives,  will  be  a  beggar,  will  be  timid  and  haughty  and 
will   suffer  grief 

A  person  born  with  Yenus  in  sign  Leo  will  acquire 
money  through  women>  will  have  an  excellent  wife  and  very 
few  sons. 

A  person  born  with  Yenus  in  sign  Sagittari  will  be 
possessed  of  excellent  qualities  and  will  be  rich. 


^70  2BIHAT  JATAKA.  [oH.     18* 

A  person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Pisces  will  be  learn- 
ed^ will  bo  a  man  of  authority^  will  be  rioh^  will  be  respect- 
ed by  tlie  king  and  will  be  liked  by  all. 

17.  A  person  born  with  Saturn  in  algn,  Aries  will  be 
a  fool^  will  wander  from  place  to  plucCi  will  be  a  fop  and 
will  bo  separated  from  his  friends. 

^  person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign   Scorpio  will  safier  im 
prisonment,   will  receive  blows,  will  be  indifferent  to  work 
and  will  be  mercHeas. 

A  person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Qemini  or  Virgo 
will  be  shameless,  will  suffer  grief,  will  be  poor^  will  have  no 
sons^  will  be  a  bad  painter^  will  be  a  constable  and  will  be 
a  chief  officer. 

18.  A  person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Taurus  will  be 
fond  of  women  of  low  caste,  will  possess  3mall  wealth  and 
will  have  several  wives* 

A  person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Libra,  will  be  the 
chief  of  a  party  of  men  in  a  town  or  in  an  army  or  in  a 
village  and  will  be  rich. 

A  person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Cancer  will  be 
poor,  will  liavo  very  few  tooth,  will  be  separated  from  his 
mothor  and  will  Iiave  no  sons. 

A  person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Leo  will  not  be 
deserving  of  respect*  will  suffer  grief,  will  have  no  sons  and 
will  carry  burdens. 

19.  A  person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Sagittari  or 
Pisces  will  die  an  excellent  deatb,  will  be  a  faithful  officer 
in  the  king's  palace,  will  have  good  sons  and  a  good  wife, 
will  be  wealthy,  will  be  the  chief  man  in  a  town,  in  an  army 
or  in    a  village. 

A  person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Capricorn  or  Aqu- 
arius will  enjoy  the  wives  and  property  of  other  men,  will 
be  the  head  of  a  town,  a  village  or  an  army,  will  have  weak 


en.    18.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  171 

eyes>  will  be  dirfcy,  will  be  indifferenfc  to  bafcliiag,  will  have 

a  permanent  wealth  and  aufchority  and  will  enjoy  the  porperty 

acquired  by  him* 

Notes. 

To  determine  the  effects  of  the  planetary    places  the 

reader  is  referred  to  Stanza  13  and  Note  (6)  to  it  of  the  last 

Ch^ipter. 

20.  The  effects  described  for  the    several  signs  of  the 

zodiac  when  the  Moon  occupies  them  or  when  they  are  as- 

pected  by  planets  also  apply  to  the  rising  sign;  nay  —  more 

effects  are  due  to  the  risnig  sign  and  to  the  2nd,  8rd,  and 

other  bhavas  (houses).  If  the  houses  be  powerful  and  if  their 

lords  be   also    powerful,  these     effects  will  come  to    pass 

fully. 

Notes. 

If  the  rising  sign  and  its  lord  be  powerful,  a  person 
born  will  be  of  strong  physique  j  if  the  2nd  house  and  its 
lord  be  powerful^  the  person  will  be  rich.  Similar  remarks 
apply  to  the  other  hhavas. 

The  following  have  been  eztraoted  from  Satyachariar's 
work  on  Horscopy. 

1.     A  person  born  when  Aries  is  the  rising  sign  will 
have   disfigured   fingers,    will  be  of  ir.isoiblo  tempr,    will 
bring  on  quarrels,  will   act  inconsistently    with  his  views> 
will  be  of  bilious  and  windy    temperament,  will   be  a  nig- 
gard, will  suffer  grief,  will  when  young,  be  separated  from 
his  parents  and  from  his  preceptor,  will  have  very  fow  soua 
will  assist  his  brothers  and   kinsmen,  will  be  virtuous,  will 
travel  to  foreign  lands,  will  engage  in    useless  work,    will 
marry  either  a  woman  of  low  caste  or  a  deceitful  woman  or 
a  woman  of  defective  limbs  or  one  who  was  already  married, 
will  obtain  as  relations  persons  of  a  friendly  nature  and  will 
meet  his  death  either  by  weapons  or  by   poison  or  by 
bilious  complaints  or  by  the  people  about  him  or  by  fire, 
by  rain,  by  being  shut  up  in  a  prison  or  by  fall. 


172  BBIHilT  JATAKl.  [OH.  18 

2.  A  person  born  when  Taums  is  the  rising  sign  will 
have  large  lips,  cheeky  nose  and  forehead,  will  be  of  phleg- 
matic and  windy  temporament^wlU  bo  liberal  in  gift^  will  be  a 
spendthrift^  will  have  daughters  and  very  few  8ons>  will 
ill-treat  his  parentSj  will  be  fond  of  workj  will  do  wicked 
deeds,  will  earn  much  wealthy  will  ever  be  fond  of  his  wife 
and  will  suffer  from  weapons.  He  will  meet  his  death  by 
weapons,  ropes  or  animals^  in  foreign  lands  or  will  die 
through  over  work  or  by  water  or  by  a  spear  or  through 
want  of  exercise  or  by  quadrupeds. 

3.  A  person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Gemini  will 
be  either  of  defective  limbs  or  will  possess  extra  limbs,  will 
be  of  sweet  speech^  will  engage  in  excellent  works^  will  be 
of  a  mixed  temperament,  will  be  of  small  naderstanding 
and  of  small  bodyj  will  be  liked  by  his  preceptor  and  by 
sages,  will  have  very  few  younger  brothers,  will  not  be  of 
very  active  habits,  will  put  other  men  to  disgrace,  will 
posses  good  qualities,  will  be  anxious  to  engage  in  a 
number  of  works,  will  be  virtuous  and  not  wicked,  will 
earn  and  spend  much,  will  possess  several  wives  and  will  be 
free  from  serious  diseases.  He  will  meet  his  death  by 
snake-bite,  poison,  animals  or  by  water. 

4.  A  person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Cancer  will 
be  a  man  of  no  fixed  principles,  will  suffer  diseases  of 
genital  organs,  will  be  of  a  timid  nature,  will  be  grateful, 
will  be  of  phlegmatic  and  windy  temperament,  will  readily 
understand  things,  will  follow  his  enemies,  will  spend  the 
property  of  other  men  also,  will  be  haughty  among  his 
people,  will  be  pat  to  disgrace  by  his  kinsmen,  will  lose 
his  children,  will  engage  in  important  works  in  foreign 
lands,  will  be  of  imperfect  speech,  will  be  a  master  over 
other  men^  will  have  an  unequal  wife,  will  suffer  disgrace 
from  his  enemies  and  will  be  respected  by  many  persons. 
He  will  meet  his  death  by  means  of  a  neck  ornament  or  a 


CH.  18.]  BRIHAT   JATAKA.  l73 

rope,  by  phlegmatic  complaints,  by  the  fracture  of  boneSj  by 
sword  out,  or  by  dropsy. 

5«  A  person  bom  when  the  rising  sign  is  Leo  will 
be  severe,  fond  of  animal  food  and  of  bilious  temperament, 
will  conceal  himself,  will  support  his  family  by  engaging 
in  various  works,  will  be  a  niggard,  will  like  the  people, 
will  be  a  man  of  renown  and  of  resignation  ;  will  annoy  his 
kinsmen,  will  be  able,  and  energetic,  will  be  of  a  sinful 
nature,  will  possess  several  wives  and  will  have  a  diseased 
waist,  knees  and  teeth.  He  will  meet  his  death  by  vi  ea. 
pons,  hurtful  animals,  by  poison,  by  wood,  by  diseases,  by 
the  creatures  or  water  or  by  starvation. 

6.  A  person  bom  when  the  rising  sign  is  Virgo,  will 
be  of  sweet  speech,  of  bright  personal  appearance,  long 
legs  and  arms,  will  be  of  a  mixed  temperament,  will  be  of 
excellent  beauty,  will  receive  wounds,  will  be  rich,  will  be 
a  niggard,  will  be  attached  to  his  kinsmen,  will  have  many 
daughters,  will  be  in  bad  terms  with  his  brothers  and 
sisters,  will  be  inclined  to  deeds  of  virtue,  will  nol^  earn 
much,  and  will  be  skilled  in  work.  He  will  meet  his  death 
by  means  of  quadrupeds,  weapons,  bilious  attacks,  grief, 
fire  or  rope. 

7*  A  person  born  when  Libra  is  the  rising  sign  will 
be  of  a  rough  body,  a  harsh  nature  and  a  phlegmatic  and 
windy  temperament,  will  thoughtlessly  begin  a  work,  will 
be  of  short  neck,  will  be  grateful,  will  acquire  much  wealthy 
will  become  famous  by  his  acts  of  liberality,  will  serve 
under  his  preceptor,  will  be  respected  by  his  father,  brothers 
and  others,  will  be  fond  of  walking,  will  be  virtuons,  will 
conceal  himself  to  escape  troubles  from  his  kinsmen,  will 
lose  his  wife,  will  be  fond  of  fight  and  will  suffer  from 
grief.  He  will  meet  his  death  by  a  famous  man>  by  his 
kinsmen,  by  mild  quadrupeds,  by  perspiration,  by  sepa- 
ration from  an  object  of  desire  and  by  the  fatigue  of 
journey* 


174  BRIHAT  JATAEA.  [OH    13 

8.  A  person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Scorpio  wil 
Lave  a  broad  face  and  a  loDg  belly,  will  be  of  a  harsh 
nature  and  of  a  bilious  temperamentj  will  have  brown  eyes^ 
will  be  slow  and  of  quick  pace>  will  be  a  master  over  others, 
will  protect  a  large  family,  will  be  hated  by  his  kinsmen, 
will  spend  much,  will  have  mauy  children,  will  not  live  in 
oomfovt,  will  have  no  eneraiesi  will  lose  his  virtues,  will 
protect  oxen,  will  fall  into  bad  temper  on  account  of  his 
wife,  will  yield  nothing  to  his  enemies,  will  have  his  own 
men  for  his  enemies,  will  suffer  from  numerous  diseases 
and  will  surrender',  himself  to  his  foe  out  of  fear  of  sword- 
cat.  He  will  meet  his  death  by  imprisonment,  blows^ 
sword-cut,  bad  diseases  or  by  fire. 

9.  A  person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Bagittari 
will  have  large  lips^  teeth  and  nose,  will  be  of  phlegmatic 
and  windy  temperament,  will  have  a  fleshy  genital  organ, 
thighs  and  arms,  will  be  of  defective  nails,  will  be  skilled 
in  work,  will  be  bold  in  fight,  will  serve  under  men  of  low 
caste,  will  be  deprived  of  his  property  by  thieves,  by  fire 
or  by  the  king,  will  be  learned  in  laws,  will  be  respected 
by  many  people,  will  give  trouble  to  his  brothers,  will 
work  in  foreign  lands,  will  be  liked  by  the  king,  will  be 
indifferent  to  deeds  of  virtue,  will  quarrel  with  his  wives 
and  will  have  a  diseased  face.  He  will  meet  his  death  by 
quadrupeds,  snakes,  the  king  or  by  imprisonment. 

10.  A  person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Capricorn 
will  have  a  small  nose,  long  face,  arms  and  legs;  will  be  of 
windy  temperament,  of  a  timid  nature,  will  thoughtlessly 
engage  in  work,  will  suffer  imprisonment,  will  have  a  small 
family,  and  smair  wealth,  will  be  a  niggard,  will  have 
daughters,  will  have  no  kinsmen,  will  live  in  plenty,  will 
acquire  wealth  by  his  valor,  through  the  king  and  by  forest 
will  observe  fasting,  will  have  a  wife  of  low  castO)  and  will 
be  attached  to  her,  will  have  a  large  body,   few    bail's   and 


CH.    19.]  BBIHAT  JATAEA.  ^  175 

weak  knees  and  will  suffer  fron  diseases.  He  will  meet  bis 
death  by  ohildren^  by  the  wiudj  by  weapons^  by  the  king,  by 
poison^  by  fall,  by  an  elephant,  by  an  increase  of  bile  or  by 
dyspepsia. 

IL  A  person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Aquarius, 
will  bo  of  inactive  habits  aud  of  harsh  nature,  will  be  the 
eldest  in  the  family,  will  be  of  bilious  and  windy  temper- 
ament, will  have  a  nose  shaped  like  the  (lower  of  the 
sesamum  plant,  will  waste  his  wealth,  will  have  mau}^ 
servants,  will  be  hated  by  his  kinsmen,  preceptors,  enemies 
and  friends ;  will  be  fond  of  deeds  of  wickedoess,  will  acquire 
much  property,  will  never  spend  money  on.  oharity,  will 
assume  a  show  of  virtue^  will  worship  the  Devas  and  will 
suffer  from  phlegmatic  attacks  affecting  the  chest.  IIo  will 
meet  his  death  from  pains  in  the  belly  by  vomition  and  by 
drugs  adminiKtered  by  women. 

12.  A  person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Pisces  will 
have  thick  lips,  fish-like  eye  and  large  nose,  will  be  of 
phlegmatic  and  windy  temperament,  will  be  a  sage,  will  be 
of  disfigured  skins  and  of  active  habits,  will  be  remarkable 
for  his  gain  and  lossj  will  have  good  servants  and  kiusmen, 
will  be  disposed  to  deeds  of  virtue,  will  have  a  good  wife, 
will  help  his  father,  will  join  a  woman  of  low  deeds  and  will 
have  bad  enemies.  He  will  meet  bis  death  by  disease, 
corruption  of  the  blood,  snake- bite«  attack  oE  a  lion,  by  the 
chiefs  of  parties  of  men,  by  venereal  diseases,  by  drags,  by 
fusfting.  or  by  the  fatigues  of  journey* 


CHAPTER   XIX 

On  Planetary  Aspects. 

1.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Aries 
and  be  aspeoted  by  Mars,  the  person  will  become  a  kiog;  if 
she  be  aspecteJ  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  learned;  if 

23 


3  76  BUIHAT  JATAKA.  [cfl.     19. 

by  Jupiter,  be  will  resemble  a  king;  if  by  VeDuSi  he  will  be 
a  man  of  good  conduct;  if  by  the  Saturn^  he  will  be  a  thief 
and  if  by  the  Sun,  he  will  be  poor. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Taurus 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  person  will  be  poor ;  if  she  be 
aspeoted  by  Mercury,  he  will  be  a  thief;  if  by  Jupiter,  he 
will  be  respected  by  the  people ;  if  by  Venus  he  will  be 
a  king;  if  by  Saturn,  he  will  be  rich  and  if  by  the  Sun  be 
will  be  a  Servant. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  ooeupy  sign  Qemini 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  person  will  sell  weapons ;  if 
she  bo  aspected  by';Mercury,  he  will  become  a  king  ^  if  by 
Jupiter,  he  will  be  learned  ;  if  by  Yenus,  he  will  be  fearful; 
if  by  Saturn,  he  will  be  a  weaver  and  if  by  the  Sun,  he 
will  be  poor. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Cancer 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  peison  will  be  a  valiant  sol- 
dier ;  if  she  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  he  will  be  a  literary 
author  ;  if  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  learned  ;  if  by  Venus,  he 
will  be  a  king ;  if  by  Saturn,  he  will  live  by  weapons  and  if 
by  the  Sun,  he  will  suffer  from  diseases  of  the  eye. 

2^  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Leo 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  an  Astrologer; 
if  aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  rich ;  if  by  Venus,  he  wilt 
be  a  king ;  if  by  Saturn,  ho  will  be  a  barber  ;  if  by  the  Sun, 
he  will  be  a  king  and  if  by  Mars,  he  will  also  be  a  king. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Virgo 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  a  king  ;  if 
aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a  commander  of  aimies  ;  if 
by  Venus,  he  will  be  vigilent  and  if  by  Saturn,  the  Sun  or 
Mars,  ho  will  live  by  f  erving  under  women. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Libra 
and  be  asptcted  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  a  king ;  if 


Orr.    19]  BRIHAT   JATAKA.  177 

&Bpected  by  jupiter,  he  will  work  in  gold  j  if  byi Venus,  he 
will  be  a  trader ;  and  if  by  Saturn,  the  Sun  or  Mars,  he  will 
be  a  chief  and  will  work  mischief. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy ^sign  Scorpio 
and  be  aspeoted  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  get  twins;  if 
aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  obedient  ;  if  by  Vernus,  he 
will  be  a  washerman  ;  if  by  Saturn,  be  will  be  of  defective 
limbs;  if  by  the  Sun,  he  will  be  poor  and  if  by  Mars  he  will 
be  a  kin£:. 

3.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  theMoon  occupy  sign  Sagit- 
tari  and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  protect 
his  kinsmen;  if  aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a  king; 
if  by  Venus,  he  will  protect  many  men;  and  if  by  Saturn, 
the  Sun  or  Mars  he  will  be  a  fop,  will  put  on  a  show  of 
virtue  and  will  not  attend  to  the  work  of  other  persons. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Capricorn 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  the  king  of 
kings ;  if  aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a  king  ;  if  by 
Venus,  he  will  be  learned;  if  by  Saturn^  he  will  be  rich;  if  by 
the  Sun,  he  will  be  poor  and  if  by  Mars,  he  will  be  a  king. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Aquarius 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  a  king  ;  if 
aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  resemble  a  King  ;  if  by  Venus 
or  Saturn  or  the  Sun  or  Mars  he  will  bo  fond  of  the  wiyes 
of  other  men. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Pisces 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  pei*son  will  be  witty  ;  if 
aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a  king;  if  by  Venus,  ho 
will  be  learned  and  if  by  Saturn,  the  Sun  or  Mars,  he  will 
do  wicked  deeds. 

Notes. 

As  stated  in  the  last  Stanza  of  the  last  chapter,  all  that 
has  been  said    of  the  Moon  applies  also  to  the  rising  sign. 


178  BBIHAT   JATAKA.  [OH.    19. 

The  Moon  by  aspecting  the  several  signs  of  the  Zodiao 
except  sign  Cancer  produces  malefic  effects  when  such  signs 
are  rising  signs. 

4.  If  at  the  time  of  birtlij  the  Moon  occupy  the  solar 
or  lunar  hora  of  a  sign^  she  will  produce  benefio  effects  if 
She  be  aspected  by  planets  occupying  respectively  the  solar 
and  lunar  lioras.  (a)  If  tlie  Moon  be  aspected  by  the  lord 
of  the  Drekkana  occupied  by  her  or  by  planets  occupying 
friendly  signs  she  will  produce  benfio  effect^,  (b).  The  effects 
described  for  the  Moon  occupying  the  several  signs  and  as- 
pected by  the  several  planets  apply  to  her  when  she  occu- 
pies the  several  Dwadasamsaa  and  is  aspected  by  the  seve- 
ral planets,  (c.)  If  the  Moon  occupy  particular  Navamsas 
and  be  aspected  by  the  several  planets^  the  elffects  will  be 
those  stated  ^s  follows. 

Ncftes. 

(a).  If  the  Moon  be  aspected  by  planets  occupying 
horas  whose  lords  are  different  from  the  lords  of  the  horas 
occupied  by  her  the  effects  will  be  malefic.  The  same  re- 
marks apply  to  the  rising  hora. 

(b).    The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  rising  Drekkana. 

(c).  The  same  remark  holds  with  reference  to  the 
rising  Dwadasamsa.  If  the  rising  Dwadasamsa  be  other 
than  that  of  Gancerj  and  if  the  rising  sign  be  aspected  by 
the  Moon  the  effects  will  be  malefic ;  if  the  rising  Dwada- 
samsa be  that  of  Cancer,  and  if  the  rising  sign  be  aspected 
by  the  Moon,  the  effects  will  be  benefic 

5.  If  at  the  tinae  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  the 
Navamsa  of  Mars  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will 
be  the  protector  of  a  city  ;  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be 
fond  of  torture  ;  if  aspected  by  Mercury  he  will  be  skilled 
in  duel  fight ;  if  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a  king  ^  if  by  Ve- 
nus he  will  be  rich  and  if  by  Saturn^  he  will  bring  on  quar- 
rels. 


CH.   19.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  179 

If  ab  the  time  of  birth ^theMoon  occupy  the  Navamsa  of 
Venus  and  be  aspeoted  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will  be  a 
fool ;  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be  fond  of  the  wives  of 
other  men ;  if  by  Mercury  or  Jupiter  he  will  be  produce 
good  literary  works  ;  if  by  Venua,  he  will  be  fond  of  com- 
forts ;  if  by  Saturn^  ho  will  unite  with  the  wives  of  other 
men- 

6.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the 
Navamsa  of  Mercury  and  be  aspeoted  by  the  Sun,  the 
person  will  bo  a  duellist  or  a  dancer  ;  if  aspected  by  Mars 
he  will  be  a  thief;  if  by  Mercury  he  will  be  a  great  poet  ; 
if  by  Jupiter^  he  will  be  a  minister;  if  by  Venus,  he  will  be 
skilled  in  music  and  if  by  Saturn^  he  will  be  skilled  in 
m^echtinical  arts. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the  Navamsa 
of  Cancer  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will  be 
of  small  body ;  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be  a  niggard 
and  will  possess  small  wealth  ;  if  by  Mercury  he  will  prac* 
tise  austerities;  if  by  Jupiter,  ho  will  be  a  chief,  if  by  Venus, 
he  will  thrive  by  women  and  if  by  Saturn^  he  will  be  fond 
of  work. 

7.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the  Navamsa 
of  Leo  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will  be  a 
man  of  angry  temper;  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be  liked 
by  the  king;  if  by  Mercury,  he  will  become  rich  by  the 
discovery  of  hidden  treasure;  if  by  Jupiter,  he  will  cairy 
his  orders  into  effect;  if  by  Venus,  he  will  have  no  sons  and 
if  by  Saturn  he  will  do  wicked  deeds. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the  Havamsa 
of  Jupiter  and  bo  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will  be 
a  man  of  well-known  powers?  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will 
be  learned  in' the  rules  of  fight ;  if  by  Mercury,  he  will  be 
skilled  in  Ridicule;  if  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a  minister ;  if 


ISO  DBIHAT   JATAKA.  [cff.   19. 

by  V^enus,  he    will   be   a   man   of  no   virility   and  if  by 
Sataru,  lie  will  be  charitably  disposed, 

8.  if  at  the  time  of  birth^  the  Moon  occupy  the 
Navamsaof  Satarn  and  be  aspecbed  by  the  Sun/^the  person 
will  have  very  few  children  ;  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be 
unhappy  though  rich  .  if  by  Mercury^  he  will  bo  haughty  ;  it 
by  Jupiter^  he  will  do  deeds  nnsuited  to  Liu  station  iu  life  ; 
if  by  Venus^  he  will  be  fond  of  bad  women  and  if  by  Saturn^ 
he  will  be  a  niggard  (a).  AM  that  has  been  said  for  the 
Moon  occupying  particular  N^ivamsas  and  aspected  by  the 
several  planets  applies  also  to  the  Sun— -with  this  exception 
that  where  solar  aspect  has  been  referred  to,  it  shall  be  read 
as  lunar  aspect. 

Notes. 

(a).  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  rising  Navam- 
sa  as  to  the  Moon — but  if  the  Moon  aspect  the  rising 
sign  when  the  rising  Navamsa  is  other  than  that  of  Cancer 
the  efifecta  will  be  malefic. 

9.  If  the  Moon  occupy  a  Yargottama  positiouj  her 
own  Navamsa^  or  other  Navamsas  and  be  aspected  by 
benefio  planets,  the  effects  will  respectively  be  full,  imper- 
fect and  small.  But  if  she  be  aspected  by  malofio  planets, 
the  efPects  will  respectively  be  small>  imperfect  and  full 
(a).  If  the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  be  powerful,  the  effects 
described  for  planetary  aspects  in  the  case  of  signs  and 
Navamsas  (&)  will  alone  come  to  pass  (c.) 

Notes. 

(a).  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  rioting  sign  and 
to  the  Sun. 

(&).  Navamsas  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  or  the 
rising  Navamsa. 

(c).  And  those  described  for  planetary  aspects  in  the 
case  of  horas,  Drekkanas  and  Dwadasamsaa. 


re«  I 


Oa.    20]  DRIHAT   JATAKA.  18l 

CHAPTER  XX. 

On  the  Planets  in  the  Bhatas. 

.  1.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  san  oc- 
cupy the  nscendant,  the  person  will  be^fond  of  fight> 
slow  at  work,  without  siglit  and  without  mercy;  but  if 
Aries  be  the  risiug  sign  and  the  SuuJ^oocupy  it  the  person 
will  be  rich  and  afflioted  with  diseases  of  the  eye  ;  if  Leo  be 
the  rising  sign  and  the  Sun  occupy  it,  he  will  be  blind  at 
night  ;  if  Libra  be  the  rising  sign  and  the  sun  occupy  it,  the 
person  will  be  blind  and  poor  ;  if  Cancer  be  the  rising  sign 
and  the  Sun  occupy  it,  he  will  have  a  mote  in  his  eye.  If 
the  Sun  occupy  the  2nd  house  from  the  ascendant,  the 
person  will  be  greatly  rich,  will  have  his  wealth  carried 
away  by  the  king  and  will  suffer  from  diseases  in  the 
face. 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Sun  occupy  the  3rd 
house  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  be  intelligent  and 
powerful ;  if  he  occupy  the  4th  house,  the  person  will  be 
afflicted  with  grief  and  mental  suOferings  ;  if  he  occupy  the 
5th  house,  he  will  have  no  sons  and  will  be  poor  and  if  he 
occupy  the  6th  house,  the  person  will  be  powerful  and  be 
subjugated  by  bis  enemy  (a). 

Notes. 

(a).     According  to  another  reading,  if  the  Sun  occupy 

the  6th  house  from  the  ascendant  the  person's  enemies,  will 

meet  with  min  According  to  Satyachariar  such  a  person  wiU 

be  free  from  enemies,   diseases  and  giief  ;  but  the  text  has 
the  support  of  Yavanachariar  and  Suchidhwaja. 

8.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  the  Sun  occupy 
the  7th  house  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  suffer 
digrace  at  the  hands  of  women  ;  if  he  occupy  the  8th 
house,  the  person  will  have  very  few  sons  and  will  become 
blind  ;  if  he  occupy  the  9th  house,  the  person  will  have  sons 


182  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  [OH.    20. 

wealth  and  comfort  (a).  ;  if  he  occnpy  the  10th  house,  the 
person  will  live  in  comfort  and  will  be  powerful ;  if  he  occu- 
py the  11th  house  the  person  will  be  very  rich  and  if  he 
occupy  the  12th  house  he  will  become  an  apostate- 
Notes. 

(a).  According  to  another  reading  a  person  born  with 
the  Sun  in  the  9th  house  will  have  neither  sons  nor  wealth. 
^Accordingly  Satyachariar  says  that  such  a  person  will  do 
wicked  deeds^  will  be  afflicted  with  diseases  and  will  attain 
an  humble  position  in  life, 

4.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  the  Moon  occu- 
py the  ascendant  such  person  will  become  dumb  or  mad  or 
an  idiot  or  blind  or  deaf  ;  he  will  do  mean  deeds  or  will 
become  a  slave  ;  if  the  rising  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  be 
Cancer,  Aries  or  Taurus  the  person  will  be  rich^  will  have 
many  sons  and  will  be  wealthy  respectively.  If  the  Moon 
occuppy  the  2nd  house  from  the  ascendant^  the  person  will  be 
a  man  of  a  large  family.  If  she  occupy  the  tird  house,  he 
will  delight  in  torturing  animals-  If  she  occupy  the  4th 
or  the  5th  house,  he  will  be  in   the  full  enjoyment  of  what 

the  houses  signify  (a).     If  she  occupy  the  0th  house^  the 

person  from  will  be  of  soft  body,  will  have  a  dull  appetite 

will  be  sparing  in  sexual  union^  will  bo  cruel  and  will  be 

slow  at  work. 

Notes. 

(a).    That  is>  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  4th  house  from  the 

ascendant^  the  person  will  bo  happy ,will  have  kinsmen  and 

houses^  and  will  be  learned;  and  if  sho  occupy  the  5th  house^ 

the  person  will  possess  iutelligonce,  sons  and  the  like. 

(5.)  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  the  7th 
house  from  the  ascendant^  the  person  will  be  jealous  of  the 
prosperity  of  other  men  and  will  be  lustful.  If  she  occupy 
the  8th  house,  the  person  will  be  fiickleminded  and  will  be 
afflicted  with  diseases.    If  she   occupy  the  9th  house  the 


"im.  20.]  BRIHAT  UTAKir  CBS 

person  will  be  1!ked  by  all  nnd  will  have  80iis>  kinsmen  and 
wealth.  If'she  occupy  the  lObh  bouse,  he  will  be  successful 
in  all  places,  will  be  virtuoos,  wea)tLy>  intellic^eni  aod 
valorous.  If  she  occupy  the  11th  house,  the  person  will  be 
famous  and  will  gain  wealth  and  the  like  and  if  she  occupy 
the  12th  liouse  frotn    the    ascendant,    the  persou  will    be 

wicked  and  of  defocbive  limbs. 

6.  If  at'the  time  of  birfch  of  a  person  Mars  occupy  the 
ascendant,  such  person  will  possess  a  wounded  body  ;  if  lie 
occupy  the  2nd  house,  the  person  will  eat  low  nienls  ;  if  he 
occupy  the  9th  house,  the  person  will  be  a  sinner  and  if  ha 
occupy  the  remaining  houses  (a)  he  will  produce  the  same 
effects  as  tho  Suu  in  those  places. 

Again,  if  afc  the  time  of  birth  of  a  personMerciiry  occu- 
py the  ascendant  such  person  will  be  learned.  If  ho  occupy 
the  2nd  house,  the  person  will  be  wealthy.  If  he  occupy 
the  3rd  house  the  person  will  be  wicked.  If  he  occupy  the 
4th  house,  the  person  will  be  learned.  ^  If  he  occupy  the  5th 
house,  he  will  be  a  minister  under  a  king  ;  if  he  occupy  the 
6th  house,  he  will  have  no  enemies.  If  he  occupy  the  7th 
house,  he  will  possess  a  knowledge  of  law.  If  he  occupy 
the  8th  house,  the  person  will  be  renowned  for  his  virtues. 
If  he  occupy  the  9th,  10th,  llth  and  I2th  houses  he  will  pro- 
duce the  same  effects  as  the  Sun  in  those  places. 

Notes. 

(a).  That  is  the  3rd  4th,  5th,  6th,  7th,  8th,  lOth^ 
llth,  and  I2th  houses. 

7.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  Jupiter  occupy 
the  12  signs  from  the  ascendant,  such  ])ersou  will  respeo" 
Hvely  be  learned,  of  gQod  nspeech,  a  niggard,  will  live  in 
comfort,  will  be  iutelljgent,  will  have  no  enemies,  will 
possess  qualities  superior  to  those  of  hit?  father,  will  do  oeeds 

24 


IB''  .  JBRiniT  JATAW.  fcH,   2(h 

unsuited  to  bis  rank  in  life,  will  be  a  devotee,  will  be  gps- 
sessed'or wealth,  will  be  full  ^^i  'gain  and  will  d(i^feaiful 
deeds. 

8.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  Venus  occupy 
the  ascendant,  such  person  will  be  skilled  in  acts  of  love 
and  will  live  in  great  comfort;  if  Venus  occupy  the  7th 
house,  the  person  will  be  fond  of  quarrels  and  of  sexual 
union  ;  if  Venus  occupy  the  5th  bouse  the  person  will  live 
in  comfort  and  if  he  occupy  the  remaining  houses  (a)  the 
effects  will  be  the  same  as  those  of  Jupiter  iu  those  pbioes; 
but  if  Venus  occupy  sigu  Pisces  at  the  time  of  birth  the 
person  will  become  rich. 

Notes, 
(a).    That  is  the  2nd,  8rd,  4th,  6ih,   8tb,  9th,  10th, 
11th  and  12tb  houses. 

9.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  Saturn  occupy  the 
ascendant,  such  person  will  be  poor,  will  be  afflicted  with 
diseases  and  sexual  passion,  will  be  dirty  will  suffer  muoh 
from  diseases  while  young.aud  will  be  of  indinstinct  speech* 
But  if  the  ascendant,  occupied  bj  Saturn,  be  Libra,  Sagittari, 
Cupricorn,  Aquarius  or  Pisces,  the  per.soa.will  be  as  happy 
as  a  king,  will  rule  over  a  village  or  a  town,  will  be  learned 
and  will  possess  fine  limbs.  But  if  Saturn  occupy  any  of  the 
other  houses  (from  the  2nd  to  the  12th)  the  effects  will  be 
the  same  as  those  of  the  Sun  in  the  same  places. 

10.  In  det^ermining  the  effects  of  the  planets  in  the 
several  houses  from  the  ascendant  the  nature  of  such  houses 
shall  bo  taken  into  account,  that  is,  whether  the  houses 
occupied  by  the  several  planets  are  their  friendly  signs  or 
inimical  or  neutral  signs  or  their  own  houses  or  their  exal- 
tation signs  and  the  like  (a).  Again,  according  to  Satya- 
chariar,  benefic  planets  promote  the  bhavas  while  malefic 
cues  reduce  them  ;  but  in  the  cases  of  the  6tb,  8th  and  12th 
liouses  the  reveno  i^  the  case  (6} 


CH.    20.]  ImtHAT  jAtAKA.  185 

Notes* 
(a).  That  IS  if  the  houses  occnpiod  by  ttio  planefs  be 
their  exaltatioa  signs^  their  friendly  signs'  or  theii  own 
houses  the  effects  described  will  fully  come  to  pass,*  if  such 
lionscs  be  their  inimical  signs  the  effects  will  fail  and  if  the 
houses  be  nontnil  signs^  neither  more  nor  less  of  the  effects 
described  willcomo  to  pass.     All  this  is  according  to  Garga. 

{V).  According  to  Satyacharlar,  if  a  betiefic  planet 
occupy  the  6th  house  tho  enemies  will  meet  with  ruin  and 
if  a  malefic  planet  occupy  it>  the  enemies  will  increase. 
Again>  if  a  benefic  platiot  occupy  the  S^h  house,  a  person 
will  be  freed  froiu  dangers  to  life  aud  if  a  malefic  platiet 
occupy  it,  danger  to  life  will  increase*  Lastly  if  a  beuefio 
plaiiot  occupy  the  i2th  house  there  will  be  no  loss  to  the 
person  and  if  a  malefic  planet  occupy  it  there  will  bo  an 
iuorease  of  loss. 

11.  If  the  planets  to  which  good  effects  have  been 
assigned  occupy  their  exaltation  signs  such  effects  will  fully 
come  to  pass.  If  they  occupy  their  Moolatrikona  HiguS 
only  three-fourths  of  such  eflfects  will  come  to  pass  ;  if  they 
occupy  their  own  houses  one-half  of  such  effects  will  conio 
to  pass;  if  they  occupy  their  friendly  signs  onc*qnartcr  0£ 
such  effects  will  come  to  pass;  if  they  occupy  their  inimical 
signs  less  thau  one-quarter  of  such  effects  will  come  to  pass 
and  if  the  planets  occupy  their  depression  signs  or  if  they 
happen  to  be  Astangata  planets  the  good  effects  described 
will  wholly  fail. 

Notes. 

If  tho  effects  be  bad,  then  if  the  planets  occupy  their 
depre  ssion  ^igrs  or  if  they  be  Astangata  planets,  the  evil 
effects  will  fully  come  to  pass.  If  they  occupy  their  inimi- 
cal signs,  then  three-fourths,  if  they  occupy  their  friendly 
eigns,  then  one-half,  if  they  occupy  their  own  signs  then  one- 
quarter^  if  they  occupy  their  MoolaTiikoua  signs,  then  less 


136  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [Ott.  1 

than  a  qunrker  of  the  evil  effects  will   come  to  pass.     But  if 
they  occupy  their  exaltation  signs,  the  evil  effcjc*^a  will  fail 


CHAPTER  XXL 

On  thk  Planets  in  the  Several  Vargas. 

1.  If  a  single  planet  occupy  it'^  own  house  tit  the  time 
of  birth  of  a  person  such  person  will  possess  the  average 
dignity  of  the  members  of  hisfnmily  ;  if  two  phmets  occupy 
their  own  houses  the'person  will  be  an  important  member  of 
his  family;  if  three  planets  occupy  their  own  houses,  the  person 
will  be  respected  by  his  kinsmen ;  if  four  planets  occupy 
their  own  honsesj  the  person  will  be  rich  ;  if  five  planets  d^ 
80  he  will  live  in  comfort;  if  six,  he  will  live  in  luxurious 
ease  and  as  happy  as  a  king  and  if  seven  planets  occupy 
their  own  houses  the  person  will  become  a  king. 

Again  if  one  of  the  planets  occupy  a  friendly  sign,  the 
person  will  lead  a  dependent  life  ;  if  two  planets  do  so  he 
will  be  protected  by  his  friends ;  if  three>  by  his  kinsmen  ; 
if  four,  by  his  brothers  and  cousins  ;  if  tivo,  the  person  will 
be  a  master  over  many  people;  if  six,  he  will  become  a  com- 
mander of  an  army  »nd  if  seven,  lie  will  bcome  a  king. 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  a  single  planet 
Occupy  its  exaltation  sign  and  be  aspected  by  a  friendly 
planet  such  person  will  become  a  king;  if  at  the  time  of 
birth  one  of  the  planets  occupy  its  exaltation  sign  and  be 
accompanied  by  a  friendly  planet>  the  person  will  become 
very  ricli  and  will  be  univer.->ally  r(^S|)ected  ;  if  at  the  time 
of  birtli  one  of  the  planets  occupy  eiiher  an.  inimical  or  a 
depression  sign,  the  person  will  become  poor  ',  if  two  planets 
occupy  their  inimical  or  depression  signs,  the  person  will 
become  afflicted  with  grief.  If  three  planets  occupy  their 
inimical  or  depression  signs,  the  person  will  become  a  fooL 

If  lour  plauols  do  &o,  tho  person  will  become  afflicted  with 


OB.  21.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA..  187 

^   ■ 
diseases.     If  five  planets^do  so  tlie*  person   will  soffer^im- 
prisonment;  if  six  plnneis^the  person  will  be  a  victim  to 
much  grief  and  if  seven  planets  do  so,  he  will   subject  to 
torture  persons  who  oaght  noi  to  be  tortured. 

Notes. 
Mercury  and  the  Sun  cannot  at  the  same  time  occupy 
their  depression  signs— viz.  .Pisces  and  Libra  respective- 
ly. Seven  planets  cannot  therefore  occupy  their  depression 
signs  at  the  same  time.  In  this  as  in  certain  other  cases 
already  stnted,  the  author  has  simply  quoted  the  views  ojE  for- 
mer writers.  v 

9.  According  to  Satyaohariar  a  person  born  when 
Aquarius  is  the  rising  sign  will  not  be  happy  ;  but  accord- 
ing  to  Yavanasj  a  person  born  when  Aquarius  is  the  rising 
Duadasamsa  will  not  be  happy.  This  latter  view  is  objec« 
ted  to  by  Yishnugupta  on  the  ground  that  each  sign  of  the 
Zodiac  contains  the  Dviradasamsa  of  Aquarius  and  that  benem 
ficial  effects  have  been  ascribed  to  several  signs. 

4*  A  person,  born  when  malefic  planets  occupy  the 
solar  horas  of  odd  signs  will  be  of  widespread  famci  will  do 
important  deeds^  will  be  powerful^  keaithy  and  of  bright 
appearance.  A  person  born  when  benefic  planets  occupy 
the  lunar  horas  of  even  signs  will  be  of  gentle  manners 
and  of  bright  appearance;  will  live  in  comfort^  will  be  liked 
by  all ;  will  be  intelligent  and  will  be  of  sweet  speech.  * 

5*  If  the  horas  occupied  by  the  malefic  and  benefic 
planets  be  the  same  as  stated  above  while  the  signs  are  dif* 
erentj  (a)  the  person  will  be  all  that  has  been  stated  above 
for  the  two  yogas  in  a  moderate  degree  ;  but  if  both  the 

m 

horas  and  signs  be  different  (b)  the  effects  will  fail* 

Notes. 

(a).  That  is  it  the  malefic  planets  occupy  ihe*'solar 
horas  in  ^ven  signs  or  the  benefiic  planets  occupy  the  lunar 
horas  in  odd  signs. 


188  BBIHAT  JATAKA.  CH.  21.] 

'  (h)  That  IB  if  tho  malefic  planets  ocoapy  the  lunar 
horas  of  the  even  s^^ns  or  the  benefio  planets  oocupy  the 
solar  horas  of  odd  s'giis* 

N,  B.  Doth  the  author  and  oommentator  have  failed 
to  notice  the  cise  of  a  person  born  wlien  the  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  lunar  horas  of  odd  signs  or  the  benefio 
planets  occupy  the  solar  horas  of  even  signs.  Evidently  a 
person  born  under  these  yogas  wH  be  all  that  has  been  btated 
in  the  4>th  stanza  in  a  moderate  degree.     . 

6.  A  person  born  when  the  Moon  occupies  either  her 
own  Drekkaua  or  a  friendly  (a)  Drekkana  will  be  of  very 
fine  beauty  and  of  well-known  virtues ;  but  if  the  Moon 
occupy-other  Drekkanas  the  person  will  be  what  has  been 
stated  above  agreeably  to  the  character  of  the  lord  of  such' 
!DrekkHna.(6)«         •  u ./  .:. 

If  at  thn  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  a  Sarpa 
(ser))ent)  Drekkana  (c)  the  person  will  be  wi;sked  ;  if  she 
occuny  an  Ayudha  (weapon)  Drekkana  (d)  the  person  will  do 
deeds  ot  torture  j  if  she  occupy  a  Chatushpad  (quadruped) 
Drekkana  (e)  the  person  will  colmbit  with  his  preceptor's 
wiJ'e,  and  if  she  occupy  a  Pakshi  (bird)  Drekkna  (f)  the 
person  will  be  of  wandering  habits.  . 

Notes. 

(a).  Friendly  at  the  time  of  birth.  Vide  chapter.  II 
stanza  13* 

(b).  That  is  if  such  lord  be  netural  (at  the  time  of 
birth)  to  the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  what  has  been  stated 
in  a  moderate  degree  j  but  if  he  be  inimical  to  the  Moon^  the 
efiVcts  will  fail. 

(c).     Sarpa  Vyala  Drekkanas  :  These  are  the  2nd  Drek 
k  ana  of  Cancer,  the  1st  of  Vrischika  and  the  3rd  of  Pisces 

{d).    Ayudha    Drekkanas  :  These   are  the  Ist  and  Srd 
Drekkanas. of  Aries,  the  2nd  of  Gemini,  the  1st  of  Leo,  ih^ 
2ud  of  Libra  and  tho  1st  of  Aquarius 


tn.  21.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  189 

(0).    Gbatushpad  Drekkanaa  :   These  are  the  Snd  Drek- 
kana  of  Aries,t}ie  2Qdand  3i'd  of  Taarus,  the  1st  of  Cancer^ 
the  3rd  of  Libra,    the    Srd   of    Soorpio   and    the    Ist    of 
Sagittari- 

(f).  Pakshi  Drekkanas  :  These  are  2nd  Drekknna  of 
Aries,  the  2nd  of  Gemini^  the  Ist  of  Leo  and  the  2nd  of 
Libra. 

If  the  Drekkanas  occnpied  by  the  Moon  be  of  more  than 
ono  character^  the  person  will  be  all  that  has  been  stated  for 
each  character. 

7.  A  person  born  when  the  rising  Navamaa  (a)  is  that 
of  Aries  will  be  a  thief ;  when  it  is  that  of  Taurus,  he  will 
enjoy  away  his  earnings  ;when  it  is  that  of  Gemini,  the  per- 
son will  bo  learned  ;  when  it  is  that  of  Cancer  he  will  be 
wealthy ;  when  it  is  that  of  Leo^  he  will  be  a  king  ;  when  it  is 
that  of  Virgo^  he  will  be  hermaphrodite  ;  wlien  it  is  that  of 
Libra)  he  will  be  bold  in  fight ;  when  it  is  that  of  Scorpi^ 
he  will  earn  his  livellihood  by  carrying  loads;  when 
it  is  that  of  Sagitari  he  will  become  a  slave  ;  when  it  is  that 
of  Capricorn  he  will  be  a  sinner  ;  when  it  is  that  of  Aqu- 
arius, he  will  be  wicked  and  when  it  is  that  of  Pisces  he  ^^r^it 
be  fearless. 

But  if  the  rising  Navamsa  be  at  the  same  time  a 
Vargottma  Navamsa  (h)  the  person  born  will  be  the  chief 
of  the  respective  classes  of  persons  mentioned  (0). 

The  rising  Dwadasamsas  produce  the  same  effects  as 
the  rising  signs. 

Notes. 

(a)«  These  Navarosas  of  Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini  &c., 
aro  Navamsas  other  than  those  of  the  respective  signs  Aries, 
Taurus,  Gemini  &c. 

(b).     That  is  Navamsas  excluded  in  note  (a). 

(c).  For  instance^  the  person  will  be  a  chief  of 
thieves  &o. 


190  URIHJLT  JATAKA«  [or.     2l« 

8.  A  person  born  when  Mara  ocoupies  His  own  Trim 
Bamsa  will  be  a  married  man>  ]¥ill  be  powerful^  will  wear 
ornameuta^  will  be  generous,  will  be  of  bright  appearauoe 
and  will    thouprhtlessly  engage  in  work« 

A  person  born  when  Saturn  oocupies  his  own  Trimsamsa 
will  be  afflicted  with  diseases  ;  his  wife  will  die  before  him,  he 
will  be  wicked,  will  covet  the  wives  of  other  nien^  will  be 

I 

afflicted  with  grief>  will  have  a  hoase^  clothes^  attendants 
and  the  like  and  will  be  dirty. 

9.  A  person   born   when    Jupiter   oconpies  his   own 
Trimsamsa  will  be  rich,  famous^  happy,  intelligent,  of  bright 
appearance^    universally  respected^    free    from  diseases,  of 
active  habits  and  will  live  in  luxury. 

A  person  born  when  Mercury  occupies  his  own  Trim- 
samsa will  be  intelligent  and  learned  in  the  fine  arts;  will  be 
a  fop,  a  literary  author,  of  distinct  speech,  will  be  skilled  in 
carpentry  and  the  ^like,  will  follow  the  rules  of  life  laid 
down  by  sages,  will  commence  bold  projects  and  will  be 
much  respected. 

1 0.  A  person  born  when  Venus  occupies  his  own  Trim- 
samsa win  have  many  s(ms^  will  live  in  comforf,will  be  free 
from  diseases,  will  love  mankind,  will  be  rich,  beautif  ul>  wick- 
ed, of  fair  body  and  will  enjoy  many  women. 

A  person  born  when  the  Trimsamsa  of  Mars  is  occu- 
pied b}'  the  Sun,  will  be  bold  in  fight  and  when  it  is  occu. 
pied  by  the  Moon  he  will  be  slow  at  work. 

A  person  bom  when  the  Trimsamsa  of  Saturn  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun  will  be  wicked  and  when  it  is  occupied  by 
the  Moon,  he  will  indulge  in  acts  of  torture* 

A  person  born  when  the  Trimsamsa  of  Jupiter  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun  will  be  of  good  disposition  and  when  it  is 
occupiei  by  the  Moou,  the    person  will  bet  o  ne  rich 


CH.    22.]  BBIHAT   JATAKA.  191 

A  person  born  when  the  Trimsamsa  of  Mercury  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun  will  live  in  .comfort  and  when  it  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Moon  the  person  will  be   learned. 

A  person  born  when  the  Trimsamsa  of  Venus  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Suii^  will  possess  a  fine  body  and  when  it  is 
occupied  by  the  Moon  he  will  be  liked  by  the  people. 


OHAPrBR  XXII. 

On  Miscellaneous  Yooas. 

1.  Planets  occupying  their  own  signs  or  their  exal. 
tation  or  Afoolatrikoua  signs  are  said  to  be  Karaka  planets 
to  one  another,  if,  at  the  suine  time  they  occupy  the  Ken- 
dras  from  the  ascendant.  In  the  above  case  a  planet  occu- 
pying the  10th  house  from  another  planet  is  said  to  be  the 
special  Karaka  of  that  planet. 

Notes. 
In  this  and  in  the  next  two  stanzas  the  term  ^^  Karaka 
(helping)  planete  "  is  defined. 

2.  Accordingly,  if  the  rising  sign  be  Cancer  and  the 
Moon  occupy  it  and  if  Mars,  Saturn,  the  Sun  and  Jupiter 
occupy  their  ezaltition  signs,  these  four  planets  are  known 
as  Karaka  plinets  to  one-auother  (a).  Again,  to  a  planet 
oconpying  the  rising  sis^n  all  planets  (b)  occupying  the  lOth 
or  the  4th  house  are  Karaka  planets  (c). 

Notes 
(a).  In  other  words  Jupiter  occupies  sign  Cancer 
which  is  at  the  same  time  the  rising  sign,  Saturn  occupies 
the  4;th  house  Librn,  Mars  the  7th  house  Capricorn  and  the 
Sun  the  lOth  house  Aries.  The  commentator  infers  from 
this  stanza  that  planets  occupying  their  Swakshetra,  Ucba 
and  Mulatr^koua  signs  are  also  mutually  Karaka  planets, 
if  they  occupy  Kendra  signs  from  one  another  though  not 
the  Kendra  signs  from  the  ascendant. 


192  BUIHAT  JATAKA.  [oH.  22. 

(I)*  All  the  planets  whether  they  occapj  their  own 
Bigns^  their  exaltation  fiigns  or  their  Mulatrikoaa  signs 
or  not,  according  to  tlie  commenr.at<)r. 

(c).  'J^hat  is  the  reverse  does  not  hold.  In  other  words 
the  planet  OGCupjin«i^  the  ascendant  is  not  a  Karaka  planet 
of  those  occupying  the  4th  or  the  10th  house. 

d.  A  planet  occupying  its  Mulatrikona  and  exaltation 
sign  (a)  is  also  said  to  be  a  Karaka  planet  to  one  that  occupies 
the  LOth  house  (b)  from  such  sign,  and  to  the  latter  his 
Atimitra  planet  is  also  said  to  be  a  Karaka  planet. 

Kotes. 

(a).  But  not  occupying  the  Kendra  houses  from  the 
ascendant. 

(l).  This  latter  planet  must  be  in  his  Swakshetra^ 
Mulatrikona  or  exaltation  house.  The  effects  of  the  Karaka 
planets  are  described  in  Varaha  Mihira's  work  on  Yoga  Yatra 
in  which  it  is  stated  that  when  a  prince  loses  his  kingdom^ 
he  recovers  it  in  the  Anturdasa  period  of  a  Karaka  planet ; 
again  it  is.said  that  a  man  enjoys  comfort,  wealth  and  success 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  house  of  a  Karaka  planet, 
or  through  the  2nd  house  from  that  occupied  by  the  Sun. 
Also,  that  the  journey  may  be  a  successful  one  it  shall  be 
commenced  when  the  Moon  occupies  either  of  the  two  places 
mentioned  above — otherwise  the  traveller  will  receive  blows 
on  his  way. 

4.  A  person  born  when  the  rising  Navamsa  is  a 
Vargottama  one  or  when  the  Af  oon  occupies  a  Yargottama 
position  will  be  happy  and  prosperous.  The  same  remark 
applies  to  a  person  at  the  time  of  whose  birth  tht^  2nd  house 
from  the  Sun  may  be  occupied  by  beuefio  planets  or  the 
Kendra  houses  may  happen  to  be  occupied  by  planets  at  all 
(a).  Also,  a  person  at  the  time  of  whose  birth  there  are 
Karaka  planets  occupying  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  will  be 
happy  and  prosperous.   • 


CH.   2?.]  BRIHAT  JiLTAKA.  103 

Notes, 
(a).     If  one  of  the  Kendras  be  occupied  the  person  will 
be  happy  ;  if   two  or  more  be   occupied  he  wiU  be  happier 
dtill  and  if  the  planets  be  benefio  the  person  will  be  exceed- 
ingly happy  and  prosperous. 

5*  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  Jupiter,  the 
lord  of  the  sigu  occupied  by  the  Moon,  or  the  h)rd  of  the 
aHoeiidaiit  occupy  a  Kendra  house,  such  person  will  be  hap- 
py when  in  his  manhood.  Again,  if  at  the  time  of  com- 
mencement of  i\  dasa  period  the  lord  of  snub  ))eriod  happen 
to  occupy  a  Prishtodaya  sign,  he  will  produce  his  effects 
at  the  end  of  the  period.  If  such  lord  occupy  a  Sirodaya 
sign  ho  will  produce  his  effects  at  the  commencement  of 
the  period  and  if  he  occupy  a  Sira-Prish  today  a  sign,  the 
effects  will  be  felt  in  the  middle  of  the  period* 

No^es. 

The  Dasa  period  is  to  be  divided  into  three  equal  parte) 
and  the  Sirodaya,  Prishtodaya  and  Siraprishtodaya  signs 
are  defined  in  stanza  10  of  Chapter  I. 

G.  The  Sun  and  Mars  produce  their  effects  immedi- 
ately after  entering  a  sign  -,  Jupiter  and  Venus  when  pass- 
ing through  the  niiddio  of  a  sign;  Saturn  and  the  Moon 
before  quitting  a  sign  and  Meroury   throughout  his  dourse* 

•  •  •    * 

Notes. 
The  sign  must  bo  supposed  to  be  divided  into  thn^e 
equal  parts  of  10  degrees  eachi. 


CHAPTER  XZIII. 
On  Malefic  Togas. 
1.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  the  5th  and  7th 
houses  from  the  ascendant  or  from  the  Moon  be  either 
occupied  or  aspected  by  benefic  planets  or  by  their  lords, 
suoh  person  will  have  respectively  sons  (a)  and  a  wife- — • 
otherwise,  (6)  he  will  not  have  either  the  one  or  the  other. 


194  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [Cfl.  23. 

If  Virgo  be  the  rising  sign  and  if  the  Sua  occupy  it,  the 
person  will  lose  his  wife  proviiled  Saturn  occupies  sign 
ris^ces  at  the  same  time  and  will  lose  his  sons  if  Mars 
occupy  sign  Capricorn  at  the  same  time.' 

Notes, 
(a.)     One  of  12  sorts  of  eons  (I)  Oorasa,  (2)  Kshetraja,  (3) 
Datta,    (4)   Krittrima    (5)    Gudhotpanna,    (6)    Apavidha,    (7) 
Kaneena,   (8)    Sahodha,   (9)   Kreetn,    (10)   PounarbhavH,    (11) 
Swajamdatta  and  (12)  Adharaaprabhava. 

(h.)  That  is  if  the  5th  and  7th  housea  from  the  a^oendant 
or  the  Moon  be  not  occupied  or  aspected  by  benefio  planets  or  by 
the  lords  of  the  honses. 

If  the  Moon  and  Saturn  occupy  the  7th  house  a  person's 
wife  wilt  qnit  him  and  marry  another.^ 

If  the  7th  house  be  aspected  by  the  Moon  and  Saturn  the 
number  of  wives  of  a  person  will  be  the  number  represented  by 
the  Navamsa  occupied  by[^the  lord  of  the  7th  honse  counting 
from  the  Navamsa  of  Aries. 

If  Jupiter  or  the  Moon  and  Venus  occupy  the  7th  house 
and  the  Navamsa  of  the  Sun  or  Mars,  the  person  will  have  a 
single  wife;  but  if  the  7th  house  be  aspected  by  the  Moon  and 
Venus,  the  person  will  have  several  wives. 

2-  If|  at  the  time  of  birth  of  ja  person,  malefic  planets 
occupy  the  4th  and  8th  houses  from  Venus  or  if  malefic 
planets  be  on  both  sides  of  Venus  or  if  Veima  be  not  ac- 
companied or  aspected  by  benefic  planets  the  person's  wife 
will  die  by  fire,  by  fall  or  by  ropes  respectivel3^ 

Notes. 

Provided,  in  the  Brst  Toga,  Venns  at  the  same  time  occupies 
an  Agni  (n«ry)  Orekkana,  in  the  second  a  Nipata  (falling)  Drek- 
kana  and  in  the  third  a  Pasa  (rope)  Drekkana.  (Vide  Chapter 
27  on  the  Drekkanas.) 

3.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  one  of  the  two 
houses,  the  12th  and  the  tJth,  from  the  ascendant  be  oocu- 


CH.  23.1  BRIHAT   JATACA.  195 

pied  by  the  Sun  and  the  other  by   the   Moon,  the   person 

and  his  wife  will  each  have  a  single   eye.     Again,  i£  Venus 

and  the  Snn  (a)  occupy  one  of  the  three  houses  the  7th,  the 

9th  and  the  5th  from  the  ascendant^  the   personvTwill    be  of  s^i'-^ul^ 

defective  limbs,  '^ 


^s 


(a.)  Venns  or  the  Moon  aooordiog  to  some.  This  is 
opposed  fo  Garga  whora  the  oomraeotator  qnotes. 

4.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  Saturn  occupy 
the  rising  sign  (a)  «nd  if  Venus  occapy  the  Chakra-sandhi 
Navamsas  and  the  7th  house,  the  person^s  wife  will  be 
barren  (6),  provided  the  5th  house  is  not  occupied  by  benefic 
planets.  Again,  if  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  12th  and 
the  7th  houses  and  the  ascendant  and  the  waning  Moon 
occupy  the  6th  house,  the  person  will  have  neither  wife 
nor  sons. 

Notes. 
(<7.)  Ik  is  olear  that  the  rining  sign  mast  be  Tanras  or 
Virpo  or  Oapricom  in  which  case  the  7th  honses  will  respectively 
be  Scorpio;  PiRcen  and  Cancer  and  the  lash  Navamsas  of  these 
three  honnes  are  knowu  as  Ohakra^andhies  or  Rikshasandhies 
(Vicle  stanza  7  Ch.  I.) 

(5.)  If  the  person  will  marry  again,  he  may  get  sous  ac- 
cording to  some. 

5.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  Venus  occupy 
the  7th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  be  in  the  varga 
(division)  of  Saturn  or  Mars  and  be  aspected  by  Saturn  or 
Mars,  the  pei-soo  will  commit  adultery.  Again,  if  when 
Venus  occnpies  the  varga  of  Saturn  or  Mars  and  is  aspected 
by  Saturn  or  Mars,  the  Moon,  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  the 
7th  house  from  the  ascendant,  both  the  man  and  his  wife 
will  commit  adultery,  ^gain,  if  when  Venus  and  the 
Moon  occupy  a  sign,  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  the  7th 
house  froni  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  have  neither  wife 


19l>  BRIHAT   JATACA.  [oH.    28* 

nor  sons.  A^ain,  if,  wlien  male  and  female  pluuets  occupy 
a  sign,  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  ihn  7ch  houae  from  the 
ascendant.  iiu<I  be.aapected  by  beneKo  planets,  the  person's 
wife  will  be  of  advanced  age  and  the  man  will  marry  late 
in  life. 

6.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  the  Moon  occupy 
the  10th  house,  Venus  tl»e7  th  hou«e  and  themal»*fic  phineta 
the  4t.li  house,  such  a  person  will  destroy  his  family,  (a)  If> 
at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturn  occupy  a  Ktuidra  house  and 
aspect  a  sign  the  Drekkana  of  whose  lord  may  be  occupied 
by  Mercury,  the  person  will  become  a  painter.  If,  at  the 
time  (»f  birth,  Venus  oo3upy  the  I2th  house  from  the  ascen- 
dant  and  tho  Navamsa  of  Sarurn,  the  person  will  be  the 
son  of  u  serving  woman;  and  if  at  the-  time  of  birth  the 
Sun  und  the  Moon  occupy  th^i  7th  house  and  be  aspected 
by  Saturn,  the  person  will  do  dcedi  uusuited  to  his  rank  in 
life. 

Notes. 
(a.)     The  fainily  will  become  extinct  with  him. 

7.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  Venus  nnd 
Mars  occupy  thu  7th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  bo 
aspected  by  maiellc  planets  such  person  will  be  afflicted  with 
swellinijr  illness  (a).  If,  at  the  tiuiC  of  birth  of  a  person, 
the  Moon  occupy  the  Navum.sa  of  Oancer  or  Scorpio  and  be 
accompanied  by  malefic  planets  the  person  will  be  afflicted 
with  diseases  of  the  genital  organ.  Ifj  at  the  time  of  birth, 
the  Moon  occupy  the  ascendant,  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy 
the  Uth  and  2n<l  houses  and  the  Sun  the  7th  house,  the 
person  will  be  afflicted  with  white  leprosy.  If,  at  the  time 
of  bii'th  of  a  person,  the  Mo(»n  occupy  the  lOth  house  from 
the  ascendant,  Mars  the  7th  house  and  Saturn  the  2ud 
house  from  the  Sun,  such  person  will  be  of  defective  limbs* 

Notes, 
(a.)     Such  as  elephantiasis  and  the  like. 


C0.    23.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  197 

8.  Ify  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person^  tLe  Moon 
occnpy  a  place  between  Saturn  and  Mars  and  the  Sun 
occupy  sign  Capricorn,  suoh  pet'son  will  be  afflicted  with 
astlinia,  consnm)>tion,  and  the  diMPa»<es  of  the  spleeii  ;  and 
if  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Sun  occupy  the  nigTi  or  the 
Naviiinsa  of  the  Mf)on^  the  pen  on  will  be  afflicted  with 
plumonary  consumption,  and  if  the  Sun  and  the  Moon 
occupy  together  either  Cancer  or  Leo,  the  peisou  will  be 
reduced  to  a  skeleton* 

9.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  Moon 
occupy  the  5th  Navamsa  of  Sagittari  (a)  or  the  Navamsa 
of  Pisces,  Cancer,  Capricorn,  or  Aries  :6),  and  be  either 
accompained  or  fispocted  by  Saturn  and  Mars,  such  person 
will  be  afflicted  with  leprosy  c).  Again,  if  the  5th  or  the 
9th  house  from  the  ascendant  bo  sign  Scorpio,  Cancer, 
Tanrus,  or  Capricorn  and  be  either  occupied  o"  aspected  by 
Saturn  and  Mars,  the  person  will  also  be  afflicted  with 
leprosy. 

Notes- 
(a.)     That  is  the  NavnmRa  c»f  Leo  in  sign  Sagittari. 

(&.)     These  may  be  NavHrosafi  of  nny  sign. 

(c.)  According  to  YavanRcharyw,  if  the  Moon  be  aspected 
by  beni>fi(!  planets  also  at  the  same  time,  the  person  will  be  of 
dibfigaieti  body  resulting  from  scratching. 

10.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  Sun,  the 
Moon,  Mars  and  Satnrn  occupy  tlie  8th,  6th,  2nd  and  .I2th 
houses  in  any  wa}",  such  person  will  become  blind  by  causes 
pertaining  to  the  most  powerful  of  the  four  planets  (a). 

Notes. 

(a.)  If  the  powerful  planet  be  the  Moon,  blindness  will  be 
caused  by  phlegmatic  aifvctions.  If  snuh  plnnet  he  Mars,  it  will 
bo  caoBed  by  bilious  ufiections  ;  if  it  be  the  Sao,  then  ,|py  heat  or 
wood  ;aiid  it  it  be  Satnrn,  it  will.be  caused  by  wiudy  affections, 
by  stones  and  like. 


198  BKIHIT  JATAEA*  [Cll.    23* 

11.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person)  the  inalefio 
planets  (a)  occupy  the  9bh^  i  lth>  8rd  and  5th  houses  and 
be  not  aspected  by  bonefic  planets^  such  person  will  become 
deaf  by  causes  pertaining  to  the  most  powerful  planet  ;  if 
such  malefic  planets  {b)  occupy  the  7th  house  from  the 
asceodautj  the  person  will  be  of  deformed  teeth. 

Notes. 

(a.)     The  Sou,  (he  Moon,  Mara  and  Butarn. 

(h.)  That  is,  wMe  •<M«f^sr  t^  %^  Uih^  3if«L  and  Mt 
l»««HnB6  aiid  not  as^tected  by  beuefic  planets. 

12.  Ifj  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  the  eclipsed 
Moon^  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  if  Saturn  and  Mara 
occupy  the  5th  and  9th  houses  from  the  ascendant  such 
person  will  be  subject  to  the  influence  of  ghosts.  Agaiuj 
if,  at  the  time  of  birth,  the^  eclipsed  Sun  occupy  the  rising 
sign  and  if  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  the  5Lh  and  9th 
houses  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  lose  hii>  eyes. 

18.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  Saturn  occupy 
the  7th  house  and  Jupiter  the  ascendant,  such  person  will  be 
afiSicted  with  windy  complaints  ;  if,  at  the  time  of  birth> 
Mars  occupy  the  7th  hou^e  and  Jupiter  the  asoeudant,  the 
person  will  become  insane.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturn 
occupy  the  ascendant  and  Mars  occupy  the  5th,  ?th  or  9th 
house,  the  person  will  become  an  idiot.  Also,  if,  at  the 
time  of  birth,  the  waning  VIoon  and  Saturn  occupy  the  12th 
house,  the  person  will  also  become  an  idiot. 

14.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  one  of  the 
four  planets — the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the 
Moon,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  Jujjiter — occupy  the  Navamsa 
of  the  lord  of  his  depression  sign  or  au  inimical  Navamsa, 
such  person  will  serve  under  other  men  for  his  livelihood  ; 
if  two  of  the  four  planets  occupy  either  the  cue  Navamsa 
or  the  other,  he  will   become   a  slave  ;  and  if  three  of  the 


«H»    23.]  BRIHAT  JAtAltA.  199 

planets  or  all    the  four  oocapy  the  one  Navamsa  or  the 
other>  the  person  will  be  the  son  of  a  slave. 

15.  If^  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  rising 
sign  be  Tauras>  Aries  or  Sagittari  ami  if  maleGo  planets 
aspect  it,  such  person  will  have  agly  teeth  ;  if,  at  the  time 
of  birth,  one  of  the  malefic  signs  (a)  or  sign  Sagittari  or 
sign  Taurus  be  the  rising  sign  and  if  such  sign  be  aspected 
by  maleGc  planets,  the  person  will  be  bald-headed  ;  if  the 
Sun  occupy  the  9tb  or  the  5th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  if 
he  be  aspected  by  malefic  planets  the  person  will  bb  of 
weak  sicrht ;  if,  at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturn  occupy  the  5th 
or  the  9th  house  and  be  aspected  by  malefic  planetSf  the  per- 
sonwitl  bo  afflicted  with  various  diseases  ;  and  if  at  the  time 
ofbirth^  Mnrs  occupy  thedtli  or  the  9th  house  and  be  aspect- 
ed by  malefic  planets,  the  person  will  be  of  defective  limbs. 

Notes. 

(a.)  These  are  the  sigpis  of  Aries,  Leo,  Scorpio,  Capricorn 
and  Aquarius* 

16.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  12th,  ^^th  2nd,  and  9th  houses  in  any 
way,  such  person  will  suffer  imprisonment  and  restraint  of 
the  nature  of  the  rising  sign  (a)-  Again^  if,  at  the  time  of 
birth,  the  rising  Drekkana  be  either  a  Sarpa  (b)  (snake) 
Drekkana  or  a  Pasa  (c)  (rope)  Drekkana  and  if  the  sign  (d) 
of  its  lord  be  aspected  by  malefic  planets  the  person  will 
also  suffer  imprisonment  of  the  nature  of  such  sign. 

*  Notes. 

(a.)     If  the  rining  sign  be   Aries,    Taurus  or  Sagittari,  the 

person  will  be  bound  with  ropes.     If  the  rising  sign  be    Gemini, 

Virgo,  Libra  or  Aqnarias,  he  will  be  loaded  with  fetters.     If  the 

rising  sign  be  Cancer,  Oapricorn   or  Pisces  the  person   will  be 

sbat  np  in  a  fortress  bat  will  be   taken  care  of.     If  the  rising 

sign  be  scorpio,  the  person  will  be  kept  in  a  sabterranean  cellar. 

B 


200  EBIIIAT  JATAKA*  [cH.   24* 

(6.)  The  Sarpa  DrekkAnns  :  These  are  the  firafc  Drekkaaa 
of  Cancer,  the  iHt  and  2nd  of  Sotopio,  and  the  3t*d  of  PUces. 

(c)  ThePasa  Drokkaua :  Thia  is  the  Ist  Drekkana  of 
Capricorn. 

((Z.)  That  is,  if  the  rising  Drekkana  be  the  first  Drekkana 
of  Cancer  for  instance,  the  lord  of  such  Driikkana  is  the  Moon 
whose  sign  again  is  Cancer.  If  the  rising  Drekkana  be  the  2nd 
Drekkana  of  Cancer,  its  h)rd  i*)  Mara  whoso  sign  is  Scorpio  and 
if  it  be  the  3rd  Drekkana  of  Cancer,  the  lord  of  such  Drekkana 
is  Japiter  whose  sign  is  Pisces. 

17.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  Moon  be 
accomptmied  bj  Suturu>  aspected  by  Mars  and  be  surround* 
ed  by  a  halo,  such  person  will  be  a  man  of  harsh  speeoh, 
will  be  afflicted  with  epilepsy  and  with  consumption  (a). 

If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Suii>  Saturn  and  Mars 
occupy  the  10th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  if  they  be 
not  aspected  by  benefio  planets,  the  person  will  be  a  servant 
of  varying  rank — dignified,  of  moderate  rank  and  of  a  low 
rank  (fc). 

Notes. 

(a.)  If  the  Moon  be  subject  to  the  first  of  the  tliree  malefio 
Yogas,  the  person  will  he  a  man  of  harsh  speech  ;  if  she  be  sub-* 
ject  to  the  2iid  Yoga,  the  person  will  be  afflicted  with  epilepsy  ; 
and  if  to  the  3rd  Yoga,  the  person  will  be  afflicted  with  consamp- 
tiou, 

(h,)  If  ooe  of  the  three  planets  occupy  the  10th  house  the 
person  will  be  a  dignified  servant.  If  two  planets  occapy  the 
10th  house  he  will  be  a  servant  of  middle  rank  and  if  three 
occupy  the  10th  house  he  will  be  a  servant  of  low  rank. 


CHA.PTER  XXIV. 

On  the  Hoboscopy  of  Women. 

1. '  The  same  remarks  apply  to  thn  horsoopy  of  women 
as.to  tho  horo£c;>pj  of  men  i  but  the  effects  which  are  suitable 


CH.   24.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  -  201 

will  alone  aflfecfc  women  and  the  resfc  will  afTecl;  their  hus- 
bands. According  to  some  all  the  ofTects  (a)  will  affect  tho 
husband.  The  death  of  the  husband  shall  be  determined 
from  the  8th  house  (from  the  asceadiint)  in  the  horoscope 
of  a  woman.  Matters  connected  with  the  physique  of  a 
woman  shall  be  determined  from  tho  risin^f  sisrn  and  tlio 
sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  and  matters  connected  with  hei* 
fortuuo  and  her  husband  shall  be  deteruiiued  from  the  7th 
house. 

Notes. 

(a,)  EQVoiu)  which  can  be  enjtiye'l  by  both  will  affect  both. 
Sach  effeotn  as  high  appointments  in  tho  state  will  nffect  tha 
husbarifi  and  matters  coiuiecfed  with  tho  body  will  Hffuuft  tho 
woman  only.  He:ioe  the  adytsability  of  a  man  marrjinf^  a  girl 
born  under  exoelleut  planetary  Yo^s. 

2.  If  the  rising  sign  and  the  sign  occupied  by  tho 
Moon  be  even  signs  the  woman  will  be  of  a  true  feminine 
character  and  if  such  signs  be  aspected  by  benefio  planets 
she  will  be  virtuous  and  modest  and  will  wear  ornnments. 
(a).  Butifsuoh  signsbe  odd  the  woman  will  p<>sse^)s  a 
masculine  shape  and  will  be  of  masculino  clnrajtur;  aVid  it* 
they  be  either  occupied  or  aspected  by  malefic  planets  she 
will  be  wicked  and  possess  few  virtues   (6). 

Notes. 

(a).     According  to  some,  virtnes  will  bo  her  ornaments. 

(&).  If  either  the  rising  sign  or  tho  sign  occnpied  hy  tl  e 
Moon  be  odd  or  even  while  the  other  sign  ih  oven  or  odd,  the 
woman  will  partake  of  the  character  of  a  malo  and  a  female. 
A  Similar  remark  applies  when  one  of  the  higns  i8  occnpied  or 
afipeoted  by  a  malefic  or  a  benefio  planet  and  the  ether  by  a 
beuefio  or  a  malefic  planet. 

3.  When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  at  tho  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  is  eitlier  Aries  or 
Scorpio,  if  tho  rissiug  Trimsamsa  or    the  Trimsamsa  occa* 


202  BBinAT  JATAKA.  [CB.    24» 

pied  by  the  Moon  be  ihatof  Mars^  she  will  beoome  un- 
chaste  before  marriage  ^  if  it  be  that  of  Saturu^  she  will 
lead  a  life  of  8er7itude.  If  it  be  that  of  Jupiter^  Bhe  will  be 
chaste ;  if  it  be  that  of  Mercury  she  will  be  deceitful  acd 
if  it  be  that  of  Yenus^   she  will  be   of  bad  couduct. 

"  4.  When  the  risiog  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  is  either  I'aurus  or 
Libra,  if  the  rising  Trimsarasa  or  the  Triinsanasa  occupied 
by  the  Moon  be  that  of  Mars>  she  will  be  of  bad  conduct ; 
if  it  be  that  of  Saturn^  she  will  Marry  a  second  time;  if  it 
be  that  of  Jupiter  she  will  possess  good  qualities;  if  it  be 
that  of  Mercury^  she  will  be  skilled  iu  music  and  dance 
and  if  it  be  that  of  Veuus^  she  will  possess  all  good  quali- 
ties and  will  be  of  wide-spread  fame.  Again^  when  the 
rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  tiirie  of 

birth  of  a  woman  is  either    Gemini  or  Virgo,    if  the   rising 

• 

Trimsamsa  or  the  Trimsarasa  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  that 
of  Mars  she  will  be  deceitful ;  if  it  be  that  of  Saturn  sh  a 
will  partake  of  the  nature  of  a  hermaphrodite  ;  if  it  be  that 
of  Jupiter  she  will  be  chaste ;  if  it  be  that  of  Mercmy  she 
will  possess  many  good  qualities  and  if  it  be  that  of  Venus, 
she  will,  out  of  Iust,^commit  adultery. 

5.  When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  is  Cancer,  if  the  rising 
Trimsamsa  or  the  'IVimsamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  that 
of  Mars  she  will  be  of  an  independent  nature;  if  it  be  that 
of  Saturn  she  will  murder  her  husband ;  if  it  be  that  of 
Jupiter,  she  will  possess  many  good  qualities;  if  it  be  that 
of  Mercury  she  will  be  skilled  in  works  of  art  and  if  it  be 
that  of  Venus  she  will  be  of  bad  conduct. 

When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  is  Leo,  if  the  rising  Trims- 
amsa  or  the  Trimsamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  that  of 
MarS)  she  will  be  of  a  masculine   nature.     If  it  be  that  of 


CH.  24.]  BRIHAT   JATAKA,  203 

Saturn  she  will  commili  adultery  jif  it  be  that  of  Jupiter 
she  will  be  the  wife  of  a  kiDg;  if  it  be  that*  of  Mercury^  she 
will  be  of  masoaline  nature  and  if  it  be  that  of  Venus  she 
will  commit  adultery  with  a  persou  of  low  caste. 

When  the  ritsin  j^  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  is  either  Sa^ittari  or  Pisces 
if  the  rising  Trimsnmsa  or  the  Trimsam:ja  oooiipied  by  the 
Moon  be  that  of  Mars^  she  will  possess  mnny  good  qualities  ; 
if  it  be  that  of  Saturn^  she  will  not  indulge  much  in  sexual 
union;  if  it  be  that  of  Jupiter  she  will  possess  many  good 
qualities ;  if  it  be  that  of  Meioury  she  will  be  a  woman  of 
knowledge  and  if  it  be  that  oE  Venus  she  will  not  be  chaste. 

When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  is  either  Capricorn  or  Aqua- 
rius^ if  the  rising  Trimsnmsa  or  the  Triuisamsa  occupied 
by  the  Moon  be  that  of  Mars  she  will  lead  a  life  of  servi- 
tude; if  ib  be  that  of  Saturn  she  will  join  a  person  of  low 
caste;  if  it  be  that  of  Jupiter  she  will  be  chaste  ;  if  it  be 
that  of  Mercury  she  will  be  of  bad  conduct  and  if  it  be 
that  of  Venus  she  will  be  barren. 

6.  The  effects  described  for  the  rising  Trimsamsa  or 
those  described  for  the  Trimsamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon 
will  come  to  pass  according  as  the  one  Trimsamsa  or  the 
other  is  the  more  powerful. 

7.  If,  at  the  time,  of  birth  of  a  woman,  Saturn  and 
Venus  occupy  each  other's  Navamsa  and  aspect  eacli  other 
or,  if  the  rising  sign  be  either  Taurus  or  Libra  and  the  rising 
Navamsa  be  that  of  Aquurius,  the  woman  will  quench  tho 
poisonous  fire  of  her  strong  lustful  desires  by  means  of 
other  women  assuming  a  masculiue  character. 

8.  If^  at  the  time  of  birth  ofawoman)the  7th  bouse 
from  the  rising  sign  or  from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
be  not  occupied  by  planets,  and  if  such  house  be  weak  and 


-01  BUIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  2  L 

not  aspected  by  beneRo  planets,  the  husband  of  the  womnn 
will  be  wicked  ;  if  such  7iii  house  be  occupied  by  Mercury 
the  husband  will  be  a  hermaphrodite  ;  if  such  7th  house  be 
a  movable  sign>  the  husband  will  be  travelling  in  foreign 
lauds  (a) ;  if  such  7oh  house  be  occupied  by  tiie  Sun^  the 
woman  will  be  rejected  by  her  husband ;  if  Id  be  occupied 
by  Mars  aspecteil  by  maleiic  planets^  she  will  become  a 
widow  while  young ,  and  if  it  be  occupied  by  Suturn  aspeo« 
ted  by  malefic  planets  she  will  remain  unmarried  to  au  old 
age. 

Notes. 

(a).  If  it  be  a  6xed  Aign  tlie  hnshand  will  remain  in  nia 
place  and  if  it  be  a  oommou  nign,  he  will  travel  to  foreign  hinds 
bat  will  be  returning  to  ItiH  place  every  now  and  then. 

9.  If  the  7th  house,  from  the  rising  sign  or  from  the 
sign  occupied  by  tho  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  wo  nan ^ 
be  occupied  by  several  malefic  p^anets^  the  w(»man  will  be- 
come a  widow;  if  such  7th  house  be  occupied  by  several 
benefic  and  malefic  planets  she  will  quit  her  husband  and 
marry  another  person  and  if  such  7th  house  be  occupied  by 
a  malefic  planet  (a),  be  weak,  and  be  aspected  by  a  boneiio 
planet  (b)  the  woman  will  be  rejected  by  her  husband. 

If  Venus  and  Mars  occupy  each  other^s  Navumsa  the 
woman  will  commit  adultery  ;  and  if  the  7th  house  from 
the  rising  sign  be  occupied  by  the  Aloon,  Venus  and  Mars, 
she  will  commit  adultery  with  tho  premission  of  her  hua" 
baud. 

Notes. 
(a).     Either  the  Snii  or  Marn  or   Satnrn. 
(t),     Eiihor  Mercury  or  J iipitQp   orVenuii. 

10.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman,  the  rising  sign 

be  that  of  Saturn  (a)  or  Mars  (6)  and  if  it  bo  occupied  by 
the  Moon  and  Venus  and  aspected  by  malefic    planets^  the 


Ctt.  2*.]  BRTIIAT  JATAK.  205 

"womnn  and  her  mother  will  otnmit  adultery ;  if  the  setiincr 
NavHtnRH  be  that  of  Mars  and  if  tlie  settin*?  BJcrn  be  aspec- 
ted  by  Saturn^  the  woman  will  possess  a  dise«'ised  genital 
organ  ;  nnd  if  the  setting  Nav^amsa  be  that  of  a  beneHc 
planet  the  woman  will  possess  a  flue  genital  organ  and  will 
become  an  ugreeable  wiEe. 

Motes, 
(a).     Caprioorn  Of  Aquai'las. 

(&J,     Aries  or   Scorpio. 

12.  If^  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman,  the  setting 
»!<:rn  or  the  setting  Navanisa  be  that  of  Saturn^  the  husband 
of  the  woman  will  be  an  old  .man  and  a  fool ;  if  such  sign 
or  Navainsa  be  that  of  Mars,  the  husband  will  be  of 
irascible  temper  but  will  be  attached  to  his  wife.  If  such 
sign  or  Mavamsa  be  that  of  Venus,  the  husband  will  be 
beautiful  and  fond  of  his  wife;  if  such  sign  orNuvainsa  be 
that  of  Mercury,  the  husband  will  be  learned  and  intelli- 
gent. 

12.  If  the  setting  sign  or  the  setting  Mavamsa  at 
the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  be  that  of  the  Moon,  the  hus- 
band will  be  full  of  lustful  desires  and  of  a  quiet  nature. 
If  such  sign  or  Navamsabe  that  of  Jupiter,  the  husband 
will  possess  courage  and  other  virtnes  and  will  have  a  con- 
trol over  his  passions  and  desires ;  if  such  sigu  or  Navamsa 
be  that  of  the  Sun,  the  husband  will  be  of  very  soft  nature 
and  will  engage  in  many  works  (a). 

Nof«8. 

(a).  A ocording  to  some  the  reading  of  this  portion  of  the 
text  is  Ratikarma  instead  of  Atikarma,  in  which  case  the  meaning 
is  that  (he  hnsbaud  will  indulge  much  in  8ezaal  union.  Again  if 
the  sotting  sign  be  ihtat  of  one  planet  and  the  setting  Navamsa 
be  that  of  another  planet,  then,  the  effects  described  for  such 
sigQ  or  Navamea,  whichever  is  powerful,  will  come  to  pass. 


206  BRIItAT  JATAKA.'  fcH,   24. 

13.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman,  the  rising 
sign  be  occupied  by  the  Moon  and  Venu'*,  the  woman 
will  beenvioas  of  the  prosperity  of  other  persons  and  will  be 
greatly  mindful  of  her  comforts;  if  the  rising  sign  beocca- 
pied  by  tlie  Moon  and  Mercury  the  woman  will  be  learned 
in  the  fine  arts,  will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  comfort  and  will 
possess  many  good  qualities;  if  the  rising  sign  be  occupied 
by  Venus  and  Mercury  the  woman  will  be  beautiful,  much 
liked  by  her  husband  and  learned  in  music,  vocal  and  in- 
strumental ;  if  the  rising  sign  be  occupied  by  the  Moon, 
Mercury  and  Venus,  the  woman  will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of 
immense  wealth  and  comfort  and  possessed  of  many  good 
qualities.  If  the  rising  sign  be  occupied  by  Mercury,  Jupi- 
ter and  Venus,  the  same  remarks   apply. 

14.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman,  the  8th  house 
from  the  ascendant  be  occnpied  by  a  malefic  planet,  the  wo- 
man will  become  a  widow  and  the  widowhood  will  occur 
in  the  AntardHsa  period  of  the  planet  whose  Navamsais  oc- 
cupied by  the  lord  of  such  8th  house.  If  the  8th  house  be 
occupied  by  a  malefic  planet  and  if  the  2nd  house  be  oc- 
cupied by  a  bcnefic  plauec  the  woman  will  die  before  her 
husband  and  if  the  Moon  occupy  sign  VirgOj  Scorpio,  Tau- 
rus or  Leo,  she  will  have  very  few  sons. 

15.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  Saturn  be 
neither  powerful  nor  weak,  the  Moon,  Venus  and  Mercury 
be  weak,  and  the  Sun,  Mars  and  Jupiter  be  powerful  and 
if  the  rising  sign  be  odd,  the  woman  will  be  of  a  masculine 
chamcter  (a). 

If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman,  Jupiter,  MarS)  Ve- 
nus and  Mercury  be  powerful  and  if  the  rising  sign  be  an 
oven  Sign,  the  woman  will  be  of  wide  spread  fame,  will  be 
vastly  learned  and  learned    also  in  the  Soeince  of   Divinity. 


CH.    2.5.]  .     BRIHAT  JATAKA.  JO  7 

Kotes; 
(a).     According  to  some  tbe  woman   will'enjoy  many  men^ 

16.  If^  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman,  the  7fck 
hoQse  f.iom  the  rising  sign  be  occupied  by  a  malefio  planet 
while  the  9th  house  is  occupied  by  some  planet,  the  woman, 
will  without  doubt  bcoomd  an  ascetic  of  the  class  belonging 
to  the   planet  o(3capy\ng  snch  9th  house  (a). 

All  that  has  been  said  in  this  chapter  apply  totheposi* 
tions  of  the  planets  at  the  time  of  promise  of  gift  of  girl  in 
marriage,  of  such  gift  and  of  marriage  (&)|  also  at  the  time 
of   query. 

Notes, 
(a).     And  the  other  efiects   already  described  will  fail. 

(&).  Provided  sach  effects  do  not  clash  against  the  effects 
dpscribcd  in  the  chapters  on  Mamage.  (vide  Chapters  100  and 
303  of  Brihat   Sarahifa). 


CHAPTER  XXV.  , 

I*  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  per6on^  the  8th  honso 
from  the  rising  sign  be  nnoccupied  and  be  aspeoted  by  a 
powerFnl  planet>  the  person  will  die  of  an  e:scess  of  the  hu- 
mour belonging  to  such  powerful  planet  /^a).ThepartoE  the 
body  attacked  will  be  the  part  which  such  8th  house  repre. 
sents  in  the  body  of  the  Kalapurusha  (6).  If  several  pla« 
nets  aspect  the  8th  house  the  part  of  tho  body  will  ba 
subject  to  several  attacks  resulting  from  an  exoess  of  the 
various  humors  belonging  to  such  powerful  planets*  and. death 
will  ensue.  But  if  the  8th  house  be  occupied  by  the  Sutii 
the  death  of  the  person  will,  be  caused  by  fire  ;  if  it  be 
occupied  by  the  Moon  the  death  will  be  caiised  by  water*; 
if  by  Mars  death  will  be  caused  by  weapons;  if  by;  Mercury 
it  will  b3  caused  by  fever;  if  by  Jupiter  it   will  be  caused 

0 


208  BttinAT  JATAKA.  [os.  25* 

Iby  some  unl^nown  disease;  iE  Yennsj  it  will  be  caused  by 
thirst;  and  if  it  bo  occupied  by  Saturn  de^ttli  will  be  caused 
by  starvation  (c).  Again,  if  the  8th  house  be  a  movable  sign 
the  person  will  die  in  foreign  lands ;  if  it  be  a  fixed  sign 
lie  will  die  in  hia  own  country  ;  and  if  it  be  a  common  sign 
lie  will  die  on  his  way. 

Notes 

Planets Hamor 

Jupiter...  •••...  Phlegm 

Venus •.       Wind        & 


(a).    Placets...  Hamor 
The  SuTi... ......  Bile 

The  Moon Wind    & 


MArs..r.:.*:r....BifaaeM^u.     j  Satoro.....  ....    Wiud 

Mercury.. •,.,  Ale 


phlegnvi 


••• 


tbree  humors. 

(I)     Yide'stanza  4  o^inpter  I. 

(c).  If  the  planet  he  powerful  tliere  will  bo  death  while- 
f^e  person  is  engaged  in  a  good  work  ;  if  the  planet  be  weak 
death  will  ensne  while  the  person  is  engaged  in  a  had  work  and 
if  Die  planet  be  neither  powerful  nor  weak  the  person  will  die 
while  engaged  in  a  work  ef  indifferent    character. 

2»  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  the  Sun  and 
Hars  occupy  the  4th  or  the  10th  house  from  the  rising  sign 
the  person  :  will  dio  being  struck  with  stones.  If 
the  4th^  7th  and  lUih  houses  be  respectively  ocpupied  by  Sa-* 
turn,,  the  Moon  aad  Mars^  the  person  will  die  by  falling  in- 
to a  welh  If  the  Snn  and  Moon  occupy  ftign  Virgo  and  if 
they  be  aspected  by  a  m^ilefic  planet  there  will  be  death 
caused  by  the  person's  kinsmen.  If  the  rising  sign  be  h 
eommon  sign  and  if  it  be  occupied  by  the  Sun  and  the 
Moou  there  will,  be  death  b}'  drowning.  •    .  i  . 

8.  If,  at  the  tiraebirth  of  a  person,*  Satnrn  occupy  sign 
Cancer  and  the  Moon  sign  Capricorn  the  person  will 
die  from  an  attack  of  dropsy.  If  the  Moon  occupy  sign 
Aries  or  Scorpio  and  be  between  malefic  planets,  death  will 
be  caused  by  weapons  or  by  fire.  If  the  Moon  occ.iipy  sign 
Tirgo  and  be  between  malefic  planets  death  will  be  caused 


en.    26]  BRIHAT   JATAKA.  209 

.■■.''  .  ; 

>     .  •« 

by  a  corruption  of  the  blood  or^  by  want  of  blooJ.     T|    tbe 
Moon  occupy  sign  Capricorn  or  Aquarius   and   be   bet^veeu 

malefio  planets,  tbere  will  be  death  by    harigirig,'  by  fito  Or 
byfnll. 

4.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  5th  or  the 
9th  house  be  occupied  by  two  malefic  planets  and  if  such 
planets  be  not  aspected  by  benefio  planets  the  person  will 
meet  his  deatli  by  being  shut  up  1h  a  prison  or  by  other 
restraint.  If  the  8th  house  from  the 'riding  sign  contain  a 
Sarpa  or  Nigala  Diekkana  (a)  death  will  also  result  from 
impriBonment  or  other  restraint.  .It'YirgQ  be^the  7tU  house 
from  the  ascendant  and  if  it  be  occupied  by  the  Moon 
accompanied  by  a  bonefio  planet,  if  Venus  occupy  sign  Aries, 
and  the  Sun  the  rising  sign,  Iho  person  will  die  in  his  own 
house  and  such  death  will  be  caused  by  a  woman* 

Noie^. 
(a.)     Vide  nofes  to  sfanza  16  of  Chapter  XXIII. 

5.  If|  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person^  (1)  the  4tli 
house  from  the  ascendant  be  occupied  by  Mars  or  the  Sun 
and  if  the  10th  house  be  occupied  by  Saturn  or,  (2)  if  the 
Sun^Mars,  Satdrn  and  the  waning  Moon  occupy  the  ascend- 
ant/the  6th  house  and  the  Dth  honso  or,  (3)  if  the  Sn^ 
occupy  the  4th  house  and  if  Mara  which  co^n pies  the  lOtli 
house  be  aspected  by  the  waning  Moon,  the  person  will  die 
in  eaoh  case  boing  stabbed  with  aspenr.  Again,  if  the  Snu 
occuj^y  the4tli  house  and  if  Mar?,  which  rocupies  the  10th, 
honse>  be  Aspected  by  Saturhi  the  person  will  die  being 
struck  with  a  piece  of  wood.    ' 

6.  ,  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  8th,  lOth, 
1st,  and  4bh  houses  be  occupied  respectively  by  the  waning 
Moon,  Mar?,  Saturn  and  tho  Sun,  the  person  will  die  being 
struck  with  a  6lub  or  fetick.  If  the  10th,' Vtb,  1st  and  5tli 
houses  bo  occupied  respectively  by  the  waning  Moon  Minsj 


210  BBIHIT  JkTkKk.  [Cff.   25. 

Saturn  and  the  Sun,  tlie  death  of  the  person  will  be   caused 
by  smoke,  by  firoj  by  imprisonment  or  by  blows. 

7.  If>  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  ^th,  7th  and 
10th  houses  be  respectively  occupied  by  Mars,  the  Sun  and 
Saturn,  the  person  will  die  by  weapons,  by  fire  or  by  the 
kiog.  If  the  2nd,  4th  and  lOtb  houses  be  respectively 
occupied  by  Saturn,  tlie  Moon  and  Mara,  the  person  will 
die  of  soroa  and  worms. 

8.  If^  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  Sun  occupy 
the  loth  house  and  Mars  occupy  the  4th  house,  the  person 
will  die  in  cousequence  of  a  fall  from  a  vehiole  or  convey- 
ance. It  Mars  occnpy  the  7th  house  and  the  Sun,  Moon 
and  Saturn  occupy  the  rising  sign,  the  person  will  die  being 
caught  in  a  machine.  If  (1)  sign  Libra  be  occupied  by 
Mars,  sign  Aries  by  Saturn  and  sign  Capricorn  or  Aquarius 
by  the  Moon  or  (2)  if  the  10th,  7th  and  4th  houses  be 
respectively  occupied  by  the  waning  Moon,  by  the  Sun  and 
by  Mars  the  person  will  die  in  the  middle  of  excrement. 

t).  If  tho  waning  Moon  be  aspected  by  powerful  Mars 
and  if  Saturn  occupy  the  8th  house,  the  person  will  die  of 
disouses  affecting  the  privities  (a) —the  part  affected  will  Le 
either  eaten  through  by  worms  or  cut  with  the  laucet  or 
burnt  or  blistured. 

Notes, 
(a.)     Such  as  pile»  and  fistula  iu  the  Pudendum  Maltebre. 

lO.  If,  at  ihe  time  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  Sun  and 
M  irs  occupy  the  7Lh  house,  Saturn  occnpy  the  3th  house  and 
the  waning  Moon  occupy  tho  4(  h  house,  tho  death  of  the 
person  will  be  caused  by  birds.  If  the  1st,  Sth,  8th  and  9th 
liousos  bo  occupied  rt^speciively  by  the  Sun,  Mars,  Saturn 
and  the  Moon,  the  person ^;i  death  will  be  caused  by  a  fall 
i  r.>m  mouiiuiii  lop,  by  an  attack  of  lightning  or  by  the  fall 
v)f  a  wall. 


CH.   25.]  BKIflAT  JTAK.  211 

11.  The  caaso  of  death  of  a  person  whose  horoscope 
does  Dot  contain  any  of  the  Yogas  ennmerated  above  shall  be 
determiued  fioin  the  22Qd  Drekkana  counted  from  the  rising 
Drekkana  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  ;  and  death  will 
be  Cfiuned  by  the  lord  of  such  (22nd)  Drekkaua  or  by  the  lord 
of  the  sign  of  which  the  Diekkana  is  a  divisioni  whichever 
is  powerful,  by  water,  fire  or  other  means  belonging  to  such 
lord  (a). 

Kotcs. 

(a.)     Vide  stanza  1  of  this  chHpier, 

12.  The  place  of  death  of  a  person  will  be  that  of  the 
sign  occupied  by  the  Lord  of  the  rising  Navamsa  (a)  or  it 
will  be  the  place  of  the  sign  of  the  planet  which  occtipies 
the  same  sign  as  that  occupied  by  the  lord  of  the  rising 
Navamsa  or  it  will  be  the  place  of  the  sign  of  the  planet 
aspecting  tlie  lord  of  the  rising  Navamsa  or  it  will  be  tho 
place  of  tho  sign  of  the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  occupied  by 
the  lord  of  the  rising  Navamsa  (&).  Tho  actual  place  of 
death  shall  be  determined  by  a  careful  examination  of  tho 
several  points.  The  period  for  which  a  person  will  remain 
insensible  beforo  death  will  be  the  time  of  oblique  ascension 

o£  the  portion  of  the  rising  sign  below  the  horizon.  If  the 
rising  sign  be  aspeoted  by  his  lord,  such  peiiod  will  be 
twice,  and  if  it  be  aspected  by  beneflo  planets^  it  will  be 
throe  times,  the  time  of  such  oblique  ascension  (c). 

Notes, 
(a)  Aries— place  frequented  by  Bheep;  Tanrns — place 
frequented  by  oxen  ;  Goinini — a  house;  Cancer — a  well;  Leo— 
a  forest;  Virgo — water-bank;  Libra — bazaar  or  store — honse  > 
Scorpio — a  hole  ;  sagtttarl — place  frequented  by  horses  ;  Cftpri- 
obrn — watery  tracts;  Aquarius— a  house;  Pidoes — wntery  places. 

Tho  above  is  general  If  a  distinct  place  of  death  be 
mentioned  in  connection  with  a  Yoga  relating  to  deatbi  the  death 
will  occur  only  in  such  a  place. 


?12  IXIHAT   JATAICA.  [oH.  25« 

(&.)  If  diflTereni  plapea  of  death  are  poiafed  oat  by  differeut 
planets,  the  place  belonging  to  the  sign  of  the  most  powerful 
planet  will  be  the  place  of  death.  Again,  of  the  two  signs  of  a 
planet,  the  plaoe  of  the  Moolatrikona  aign  will  be  the  place  ot 
deJa,th,  According  to  some,' the  placo  of 'death  is  the  partioolar 
portion' of  the  litVnse  belonging  to  the  most  powerful  planet — 
snoh  as  the  place  of  worship,  the  bath — room^  the  .kitchen  &o* 
(vido  s»anzvJ2  of  Chapter  II.)  ,    . 

(o.)  If  the  lising  sign  be  aspected  by  its  lord  and  by  a 
beneflo  planet  the  period  of  insensibility  will  bo  6  times  as    long. 

13.  If,  at  the  iimo  of  birth  of  a  person,  the  22ad 
Drekkieina  from  the  risirijg  Drekkana  be  a  fiery  Drt^kkana  (a) 
the  body  of  thd  person  after  death  will  be  burnt  and  I'eda- 
ced  to  ashes. '  'If  the  22Qd  Drekkana  bo  a  watery  Drekkana 
(&)  the  body  will  be  thrown  into  water;  if  suoh  Drekkana 
be  a  Misra  Drekkana  (c)  the  body  will  be  neither  burnt  nor 
thrown  into  water  bub  allowed  to  dry  up.  If  the  8th  house 
contain  a  Sarpa  Drekkana  (d)  the  body  will  be  devoured  by 
dog9,  jackals^  crows  and  the  like*  Thus  h:is  been  described 
the  ohange  of  the  body  after  death.  For  a  knowledge  of 
the  past  and  future  life  of  a  person  and  of  the  nature  of 
such  life  the  reader  is  referred  to  higher  works  ou  lioroscopy* 

Notes. 
'    .  (a.)     A  Fiery  Drekkana  is  the  Drekkana  of  a  malefic  planet* 

(h.)     A  watery  Drekkana  is  the  Drekkana  of  a  benefio  planet* 

(c*)  A  Miara  Drekkana  is  the  Drekkana  of  a  benefie  planet 
occupied  by  a  malefic  planet  as  well  as  the  Drekkana  of  a  malefio 
planet  occu])iod  by  a  beuefic  planet. 

(il)     Sarpa  Drekkanas  *. — These  are  the  Istand  2nd  Drek« 

kanas  of  Cancer,  the  Ist  and  2ud   Drekkanas  of  Scorpio  and  the 

3rd  Drekkana  of  Pisces.     According   to  Subhodhiui,  the   terms 

•VVyala  yarga"    is  interpreted    int*  the   Drekkanas  of   Vjala 

Sarpa),  Giadhra  (vulture),  Kula  (hog)  and  the  like. 


Ca.   25.]  BBIHIT  JATIKA.  21 3 

H.  If  the  lord  of  the  Drekkaii'a  ocoapied  by  the  Sua 
or  the  Moon^  whichever  is  powerful,  be  Jupiter,  the  person 
lias  come  from  Devaloka  ^  if  such  lord  be  cither  the 
Moon  or  Venus,  the  person  has  come  from  Pitriloka  ;if  such 
lord  be  the  Sun  or  Mara,  th6  person  hns  come  from  the 
world  of  lower  animals  ;  and  if  such  lord  be  either  Saturn 
or  Mercury,  the  person  has  couie  from  the  region  of  hell. 

I  •  •  •     .    ■        • 

•  .  t 

If  the  lord  of  the  Drekkana  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  the 

Moon,  whichever  is  poworrul,  bo  in  his  exaltation  sign  such 

last  life  of  the    person   will  be  of  an  exalted    character  ;    if 

such  lord  occnpy  a  place  between  the   exaltation  and  de" 

pression  signs  the  last  life  will  be  one  of  middle  importance  > 

and  if  such  lord  occupy  his  depression  8i<i[n  the  Just  life  of 

the  person  will  be  one  of  a  low  character. 

'    * 
15.  .  If  the  6th  and  the  8th  houses  be  unoccupied j  the 

person  will,  after  death,  go  to  the  world  of  the  planet  most 
powerful  of  the  lords  of  the  Drekkanas  of  such  (ith  and  8th 
houses  (a)  ;  or  the  person  will  g(>  to  the  world  of  the  planet' 
occupying  the  6th,  7th  or  the'  8th  hou^e  (6).  Again,  if 
Jupiter  occupy  the  6th  house  or  one  of  ihe  Kendra  houses 
or  the  8th  house  and  be  at  the  saine  time  in  his  exaltation 
sign  or  if  the  rising  sign  be  Pisces  and  Jupiter  occupy  it' 
and  be  in  the  Navamsa  of  a  beoeGo  planet  while  the  other 
planets  are  weak,  the  person  will  obtain  Salvation  after 
death,  (c)  «  ;»  r 

Notei. 

I  '  ■     ■  —     .     '     ■  '  '       ■.  •      .     '  •  ' 

(a).    For  the  worlds  of  the  several  plane(f«,  vide  Inst  stanza. 
(6.)     If  two  or  more  planets    oooapy  Ihe   6th,  7th  and  8th. 

houses,  the  person  will  goto  the  world  of  the.  mpst    powerful 
of  them.  I   • 

(c)\  The  tiext  world  siny  also  be  delcrmincd  from  the 
position  of  the  planotii  at  the  time  bf  death  a^at  '  tho  time  of 
birth  of  a  person.  '  '    ' 


214  B&1HAT   JATAKA.  [CH.   2$. 

C AFTER  XX  VL 
On  Lost  Horoscopes. 

1.  When  a  person  is  ignorant  of  tlio  tin^e  of  his  concep- 
tion or  birth^  the  time  of  birth  sha1l|  when  duly  question- 
ed about,  Vie  determined  from  the  Prasua  Lagna  (a).  IE 
the  Ist  half  of  the  rising  sign  be  cut  by  the,  horizon^  the 
month  of  birth  will  be  in  the  Uttarayana  (b)  and  if  the  2ud 
half  be  cut  by  the  horizon  the  month  will  be  in  the  Dekshi-o 
naynna  (c). 

Notes. 
(a).    Prasna  Lagna  :  the  rit^ing  sign  nt  the  time  of  qnery . 
(b),     nttara^ana  :  the  6  monlhs  from  Oapricorn  (o'. Gemini, 
(c),     Dekshinayaua  :  the  6   months  from   Cancer  to  Sagit^ 
tari. 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  qaery  the  first  Drekkana  of  a  sign- 
begin  to  rise,  the  sign  occapied  by  Jupiter  at  the  time  birth 
will  be  the  Prasna  Lagna  itself.  If  Iho  2Dd  Drekkana  of  a 
sign  begin  to  rise  at  the  time  of  quevy^  the  sign  ocpupied 
by  Jupiter  at  the  time  birth  will  be  the  -^th  sign  from  the 
Prasna  Lagna;  if  the  3rd  Prekkana  of  a  sigu  begin  to  rise  at 
the  time  of  qaeryi  the  sign  occupied  by  Jupiter  at  ihe  time 
of  birth  will  be  the  ^th  sigu  from  thePrasana  Lagna  (a\  The 
year  of  birth  shall  then  be  determined  from  the  appearance 
of  the  person  (6).  If  the  Sun  occupy  the  Prasana  Lngnaor 
if  the  Drekkana  of  the  Sun  rise  at  the  time  of  query,  the 
Ilitu(a  period  of  2  months)  of  birth  will  beQree3hma(wheM  the 
Sun  passes  througli  Gemini  and  Cancer)  ;  and  in  the  case  of 
other  planets  their  Bitus  have  been  mentioned  elsewhere 
(c).  If  the  Bitu  thus  determined  do  not  happen  tobetho 
Kita  of  the  Ayana  already  determined,  the  correct  Ilitu 
fibalt  be  determined  as  explaiued  in  the  next  stanza  Ct2). 

Notes. 
'.ii>a.    In  other  word?,   if  the  ribing  Dwadasamsa  at  the  time 
of  query   be  the    first,  the  sign  ocenpied  by  Japtier  at  the  time 
ef  birth  will  be  the    Prasana  T^agua  itself;  ii  the  riidog  Dwada-^ 


CH.  2C.]  BBiHAt  jatakA.  21  S 

BAtiiRa  bo  tho  2ticl,  Uie  mgn  oconpied  by  Japifer   ni  Die  iimo  of 
birth  T?ill  be  the  2nd  sign  from  the  Prasaa  Lagna  and  so  0I14 

h,  As  Jnpiier  takes  12  years  to  go  tonnd  ilie  beavens,  if 
tbe  nnmber  of  ciroaits  passed  throngh  by  Japiter  from  the  time  of 
birth  be  known,  the  age  of  the  person  oaa  be  at  once  determined. 
Vor  instance  suppose  Japiter  to  occupy  sign  Scorpio  at  the  time 
of  qnery  and  sign  Tanrns  at  the  time  of  birth«  and  suppose  him 
to  be  in  his  4th  circnit.  The  nge  of  the  person  will  beSX  12 
4  C  or  4*2  years.  The  cyolo  of  Japiter  can  be  determined  from 
the  appesrance  of  the  person — from  a  rough  estimate  of 
bis  age.  In  the  instance  cited  above  the  age  of  the  person  ia 
either  6,  or  124.6=18  or  24  +  6=30  or  36+  6=  42  and  so 
on.  If  however  the  cycle  of  J^upiter  cannot  be  easily  ascertained 
from  the  appearance  of  the  person,  tho  nnmber  of  the  cycle 
shall  be  determined  from  the  part  of  body  touched  by  a  person  at 
the  time.  In  stanza  24  of  chapter  70  of  the  Brihat  SamhiiS;,  tho 
hnman  body  is  divided  into  ten  parttf,  each  part  corresponding 
to  a  Dasa  period  of  12  years, 

(]).  Feet  and  ankles. 

(2)«  Shanks  and  knees. 

(3).  The    thighs  and  genital  organ. 

(4).  The  loins  and  the  navel. 

(5).  The  belly. 

(6).  The  breast  and  the  bosoms. 

(7).  The  shonlders. 

(8).  Tho  neck  and  lips. 

(9).  The  eyes  and  brows. 

(10).  The  forehead  and  the  head.  So  that  if  the  belley  be 
tonched,  it  may  be  determined  that  at  the  time  of  qnery  Jnpiter  is 
in  his  5th  ronnd.  So  that  the  age  of  the  person  will  be  4  Xl2 
or  48  years,  plus  the  nnmber  of  years  taken  by  Japiter  to  move 
from  tho  pign  occapied  by  him  at  the  time  of  birth  to  the  sign 
occupied  by  him  at  the  time  of  qaory. 

fc).  So  that  if  the  San  occupy  the  Prasna  Lagna  or  if  the 
Drekkana  of  tho  San  rise  at  the  time  of  query,  the  Rilu  is 
Qrecshma, 

•3) 


SIG  BBIHAT  JATAEA.  [cH.    28 

If  Venus  oconpy  ibe  Prasna  liagna  or  if  ilie  Drekkana 
of  Venus  rise  at  the  time  of  qaery,  the  Rita  is  Vasanta  (when 
the  San  passes  throagh  Aries  and  Tanrus).  la  the  case  of 
Mara  and  liis  Drekkana  the  Rita  is  Greeshxna  (Gemini  and 
Cancer).  In  the  case  of  the  Moon  and  her  Drekkana,  tho 
Kitais  Varsha  (Leo  and  Virgo).  In  the  case  of  Mercury  and  his 
Drekkana,  the  Kifcu  is  Sarat  (Libra  and  Scorpio).  ]  a  the  case  of 
Jupiter  and  his  Drokkuna,  the  Rita  is  Hemanta  (Sagittari  and 
Gnprioorn)  In  the  case  of  Saturn  and  his  Drekkana  the  Rita  ia 
Sisira  (Aquarius  and  Pisces).  If  two  or  more  planets  occupy  tho 
Prasna  Lngna,  the  Rita  of  the  most  powerful  planet  will  bo  the 
Bita  of  birth* 

(d).  Suppose  the  Ayana  determined  from  stanza  I  to  be 
Ihe  Uttarayana  so  that  the  month  of  birth  is  one  between  Oapri- 
oorn  and  Qemini.  Suppose  the  Prasna  Lagna  to  be  oconpied  by 
the  Moon  whose  Rita  is  Varsha  (Leo  and  Virgo);  in  such  a  case, 
the  Ritu  of  Venus,  the  alternative  planet  of  the  Moon  viz  the 
Vasanta  (Aries  and  Taurus)  shall  be  determined  as  the  Rita 
of  birth  as  explained  in  the  8rd  stanza. 

3.  If  the  Rita  do  not  agreo  with  the  Ayana  then  tho 
Iwitu  of  the  alternative  planet  shall  be  determined  as  the  Bitu 
of  birth  of  a  person  (a).  Tho  Moon  and  Vonus  are  alternative 
])laiiol.s.  So  arc  Morcury  and  Mars  (h),  and  so  Jupitor  and 
Saturn.  If  the  ilr»t  half  of  tho  risings  Drekkana  ahonld 
rise  at  the  time  of  qaer}^,  the  month  of  birth  will  be  the 
first  of  the  two  months  of  the  Ultu  and  if  the  second  half 
shonld  rise  then  the  2nd  month  of  the  Bitu  will  be  the 
month  of  birth.  The  date  of  birth  shall  be  determined  from 
the  portion  o{  the  half  Drekkana  that  has  risen  above  the 
horizon,    (c) 

Notes. 

(a).  This  point  has  been  already  explained,  vide  note  (J)  to 
the  last  stanza. 

(b).    According  fo  the  commentator  Mercary,  Mars  and  the 
Bun  are  aUtruative  planets. 


CH.  2G.]  UBIfiAT  JATAXA*  .  217 

(c).  As  the  halfiDrekkana  which  may  be  risiofif  at  the  time 
of  qaery  represents  all  the  80  days  of -a  month,  if  jost  one  half 
of  it  shonld  have  risen  above  the  horizon,  the  birth  roust  have 
occurred  just  after  15  days  of  the  month.  lu  other  words,  the 
date  of  birth  may  be  determined  from  the  portion  of  the  half 
fiign  that  has  risen  above  the  horizon  by  proportion .  A  Drek- 
kana  is  10  degrees;  half  a  Drekkana  is  5  degrees  and  ft  thirtieth 
part  of  it  is  10  minntep,  so  thatovery  lOmiuutes  of  the  rising  half 
Drekkana  represents  a  day.  It  will  be  convenient  if  the  Lagnii 
ephuta  t.  e.  the  exact  longitude  in  signs,  degrees  and  minutes  of 
the  point  of  the  ecliptic  cut  by  the  horizon  be  determined  in  the 
fit  st  instance  (vide  Appendix)* 

4.  The  Learned  Brahmins  in  the  Science  of  horoscopy 
say  that  the  number  of  degrees  passed  over  by  tlio  Sun  in 
any  particular  sign  represents  the  lunar  day  at  the  tiino  of 
birth  (a).  If  the  Prasna  Lagna  be  a  c2a?/-«i^n  tho  birth 
will  have  occurred  at  nigh\»  and  if  it  be  a  mght-sign^  the  birth 
will  have  occurred  by  day;  the  ghatika  of  birth  shall  ])q 
determined  from  the  portion  of  the  rising  sign  that  has 
risen  above  the  horizon  [Jb). 

Notea. 

(a).  Beginning  from  the  first  lunar  day  in  the  Moon's  in- 
orease.  Suppose  the  Sun  to  occnpy  the  24t.h  degree  of  Sngittnri 
at  the  time  of  birth.  The  lunar  day  or  Tithi  at  the  time  of  birth 
18  the  24th  day  from  the  first  day  in  thd  Moon's  increase  or 
24-15  or  the  9th  day  in  her  wane. 

(&).  The  length  of  the  day  or  night  of  birth  1  eing  known 
it  is  represented  by  the  rising  sign  and  the  Lngna  Sphnta  will 
give  us  the  exact  proportion  of  the  Sign  that  has  risen  above 
the  horizon.  By  the  Rule  of  Three  we  cau  arrive  at  the  exact 
time  of  birth  from  Snn-rise  or  San  set.  When  this  is  known  the 
horoscope  may  be  cast  with  the  help  of  the  astronomical  tables 
or  the  Almanac.  The  fiist  four  stanzas  therefore  give  us  a 
ompleto  process  for  the  discovery  of  the  time  of  birth  of  ^ 
ovson   from  thePjasnaLffgna* 


219  BrjHAT  jAtaea.  [cu  26« 

5.  According  to  some  the  lanar  moiith  of  birth  shall 
1)6  determined  from  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  at 
the  time  of  query  (a)*  Again,  the  sign  occupied  by  tho 
Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  will  bo  either  the  Prusna.Lagna 
or  the  Sth  house  or  9th  house  from  it  whichever  is  most 
powerful.  If  it  be  difficult  to  determine  which  of  the  threo 
signs  is  most  powerful,  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  will 
be  the  sign  represented  by  the  part  of  body  of  Kalapurusha 
that  may  happen  to  bQ  touched  by  a  person  at  the  time  of 
query  or  the  sign  may  be  determined  from  the  like  indioft* 
tions  occurring  at  the  time  of  qu6rj({/). 

Notes. 

(a).  Tho  rule  stated  in  the  Text  is  very  vagae.  What  the 
author  means  is  thus  explained  by  the  commentator. 

Suppose  each  Navarasa  to  be  divided  into  9  equal  parts ; 
then/  if  at  the  time  of  query  the  place  occupied  by  the  Moon  be 

Beyoncl  the  And  within  the  The  lunar 

month  will  bo 

(1).  Sth  part  ol   the>     7th  part  of  the  Na- f  ^^^^^j^^^^ 
Navamsa  of  Aries.     •••  J  vamea  of  Taorus        ...  i 

(2).  7th  part  of  tho  >     Cth  part  of  the  Na-^^         ,^^ 
Navamsa  of  Taurus  ...  J  vamsa  of  Qemiui        ...  t        ° 

(3).  6th  part  of  the  >      5th  part   of  the  Na- C  p^^^j^^ 

I  of  Oaucer        •••  \ 


Navamsa  of  Gemiui  ...  S  vamsa 

(4).  5th  part  of  the  >      4th   part  of  the  Na-C^    ^^^^ 
Navamsa  of  Oaucer    •••  5  vamsa  of  Leo  •••< 

(5).  4th  part  of  the  >      7th  part  of  tho  Na-  <  pi.^, 
Navamea  ot  Leo        ...  $  vamsa  of  Virgo         ...  (        ** 

(C).  7th   part  of  the  )     6th  part  of  the  Na-  C  oi^^Hra.      ', 
Navamsa  of  Vngo    •••  )  vamsa  of  Libra  ...  <. 

(7).  6th   part  of  the  >      5th    part  of  the  Na-|vaiBftkha 
Navamsa  of  Libra      ...  J  vamsa  ot  Scorpio       •.•t 

(8).  Sth  part  of  the  >      4th  part   of  the  Na-  (  j    gi^fc^a. 
JJavamsa  of  Scorpio  •«•  >  vamsii  ui  Sugitian     ...  i   *' 


CH.    26.]  DRIHAT  JATAKA.  '219 

(9).  4th   part  of  the  >      3id  part  of  the  Na-C^^^^^j,^ 
Navamsii.urSagiitari...  )  vamsa  of  Capricorn     •••<.  ' 

(10).  3rd  part  of  the  >      2nd   part  of  the  Na- C  g^^^^^^^^ 
N.  of  Cnpricurii.         ...  3  vamsa  of  Aquarius    ...  <. 

(1 1).  2nd   partfol  Hie  >     5th   p«rfc  of  the  Na- <  sh^arapada 
J^avamsa  of  Aquarius •••  3  v&ni8U  of  Pisces         •••  ( 

(12).  5t.h   park  of  the  >      8th  parfc  of  tho  Na-C^^^       . 
Navamsa  of  LMsces     ...  3  vniusa  of  Aries.  .••(,  J'  J  * 

(6).  Forjiistaneej  if,  at  the  time,  oreaturos  representiog  any 
of  the  «igna  of  the  Zodino  ho  seen  or  theii*  soands  heard,  the 
Moon  Kill  occapj  such  sign  at  the  time  of  hirtb. 

C.  The  sign  occopied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth 
of  a  person  will  be  asi  many  signs  removed  from  the  sign 
occupiod^^by  tho  Moon  at  tho  time  of  query  as  the  Moon  id 
removed  from  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  qaery  (a)* 
Bit  if  the  rising  sign  be  Pisces,  then  Pisoes  will  be  the  sign 
occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth.  (In  case  of 
doubt)^  the  sign  shall  be  determined  by  any  articles  of  food 
that  may  be  brought,  any  figures  that  may  appear  or  by  any 
Bounds  that  may  be  heard  at  the  time  (6). 

Notes. 
(a).  For  instance,  snppose  Scorpio  in  the  rising  sign  and 
Pisces  ihe  .Hgn 'oconpted  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  query. 
From  Scorpio  to  Pisces  is  5  sign!< ;  tJie  5th  sign  from  Pisces  is 
Cancer.  Cancer  will  therefore  be  the  sign  occapied  by  tho  Moou 
lit  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person. 

(6).  From  articles  having  the  shape  of,  or  in  any  way 
connected  with  the  creatares  representing  the  signs  of  tho 
Zodiac  aiid  from  the  sounds  of  tho  like  creatnre,the  sign  occupied 
by  the  Moon  may  be  determined.  In  all  these  cases,  it  is  assum- 
ed, that  an  all-pervading  Intelligent  Being  helps  an  astrologer 
by  various  signs  and  suggestions. 

7.  The  rising  sign  at  tho  time  of  birth  will  be  llie 
Bign  of  the  lord  of  the  rising  Navamsa  at  the  time  of  query 
(a).     Or,   the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  birth  will  be  as 


220  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [CU*  2C# 

many  signs  removed  from  Prasna  Lagna  as  the  Drekkana 
occupied  by  the  Sua  is  removed  from  the  rising  Drekkana 
at  the  time  of  query  {h). 

Notes. 

(a).  Snpposfng  the  rifling  Navamsa  at  the  tirno  of  qnery  to 
he  that  of  Sagittari^  the  rising  bigii  at  the  time  of  birth  is  Sagit^ 
turi. 

(&).  Suppose  the  risiog  Drekkana  at  the  time  of  query  to 
be  the  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Gemini  and  the  Drekkana  occupied 
by  the  San  at  the  same  time  to  be  tlie  3rd  Drekkana  of  Sagittari. 
The  number  of  Drekkauas  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  20. 
Therefore  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  birth  is  the  20th  sign 
from  Gemini ;  subtracting  12  from  20  it  is  the  8th  sign  from 
Gemini  i.  e.,  sign  GapricorUi 

8.  Or^  multiply  the  Sphuta  (Longitude)  of  the  phinet 
or  of  the  most  powerful  planet  occupying  the  rising  sigu 
by  the  number  of  inches  iu  the  length  of  the  shadow  of  a 
twelve  inch  Sanku  (a  straight  rod)  phiced  vertically  on  a 
horizontal  surface  and  in  the  sun  ;  divide  tho  product  by 
12.  The  remainder  will  give  the  rising  sign  at  tho  time  of 
birth  (a).  According  to  others^  if  the  querent  bo  seated  at 
the  timo  of  query^  tho  7th  house  from  the  rising.sign  at  tho 
time  will  bo  tho  Lagna  at  tho  timo  of  birth  ;  if  the  querent 
be  hjing  at  the  time^  the  4th  house  from  the  rising  sign  will 
be  tbe  Lagna  at  the  time  of  birth  ;  if  the  querent  be  stan' 
ding  at  tho  time^  then^  the  10th  house  will  be  the  L  igna 
and  if  he  be  rising  from  his  seat^  then  the  rising  sign  itself 
will  bo  the  Lagna  at  the  time  of  birth  (&]. 

Notes. 

(a.)  Snppose  the  longitude  of  the  planet,  or,  (whore  there 
are  several  planets)  of  the  most  poweifal  planet  occupyiug  tlio 
libing  bign  to  be  4>  signs  10  degrees  aud  20  minutes  and  suppose 
the  length  of  the  shadow  to  be  4j  indies,  the  product  of  the  two 
iiumbors  is  10  signs  10  degrees   aud  30  minutes,     Thi^   divided 


CH.   26]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  22l 

by  12  gives  as  remainder  7  signs,  16  degrees  and  30  minateS' 
Tde  Lflgna  tkh  the  time  of  birth  is  therefore  the  8th  sigo  from 
ArieF,  which  is  sign  Scorpio. 

(b.)  According  to  Subhodhini,  the  7th,  4th,  10th  and  l«fc 
honses  are  not  with  reference  to  the  Frasna  L%giia  as  explained 
by  Bhatta  Utpala  bat  with  reference  to  the  Lagna  obtained  from 
the  process  given  in  the  first  half  of  the  text,  that  is,  from  sign 
Scorpio  in  the  instance  qaoted  in  note  (a). 

9,  If  the  rising  sign  at  tho  time  of  query  be  Taurus 
or  Leo^  multiply  the  Ligna  Sphuta  (the  longitule  of  the 
ascendant)  by  10  ;  i£  it  be  Gemini  or  Scorpio,  then,  multi- 
ply the  sphuta  by  8 ;  if  Aries  or  Libra,  then  by  7  ;  if  Virgo 
or  Capricorrr,  then,  by  5 ;  and  if  it  be  any  of  the  remaining 
Rigtip^  thon  by  tbo  number  of  such  sigu  from  Arios  (a). 
Again,  if  the  planet  occupj'iug  the  rising  sign  be  Jupiter 
multiply  the  Lagua  sphuta  by  10;  if  it  ba  Mars,  by  8;  if 
Venus  by  7 ;  if  any  of  the  remaining  planets  by  5 ;  if  severul 
planets  occupy  the  rising  sign,  then  multiply  the  Lagna 
Sphuta  by  the  factor  for  each  of  such  planets.  Add  up  the 
several  products  and  find  the  sum  (&)• 

Motes. 

In  this  and  in  the  next  stanza  the  author  slates  a  process 
for  discovering  the  Nakshatra  (asteridm  occupied  by  the  Moou) 
of  the  querent,  his  wife,  brother,  sou  and  enemy.  Tne  figures 
given  in  the  text  are  known  as  those  of  Rast  Gunakara  and 
Qraha  Gunakara — Zodiacal  and  Planetary  factors,  referred  to  iu 
the  chapter  on  Ashtakayarga, 

(a.)  For  iuRtance,  if  Oancer  be  the  Rign>  it  being  the  4tli 
sign  from  Aries,  the  factor  for  Oaucor  is  4.  The  factor  for 
Sugittai'iis  9;  that  for  Aquarius  is  il  and  that  for    Pisces  is  12. 

(h.)  Suppose  the  Lagna  sphuta  to  bo  5'  10*^  20''  and  sup« 
pose  Jupiter  and  Venus  to  occupy  the  rising  sign.  Now,  from  the 
Langa  Sphuta  it  is  evident  that  the  rising  sigu  is  Virgo.  The 
factor  for  Virgo  is  5,  multiplying  5"  10?   20,  by  5,  wc  get   2G 


222  HUIIIAT  JATAKA.  [CU   26 

or  i'(y  Dividing  this  by  12  we  got  as  remainder  2»  21»  40^  (R.) 
Again^  ilie  fnctor  for  Jupiter  id  10  and  that  for  Yen ns  is  7. 
^lultiplyiiig  5-  W  20'  by  10  wo  got  53'  13"  20^  Dividing  by  12 
we  get  as  remainder  5"  18**  20'.  Again,  multiplying  5'  10°  20'  by 
7  we  get  37-  12°  20^  Dividing  by  VI  we  get  1*  12°  20^  Adding 
tbia  to  5- 13°  20'  we  get  C*  25°  ^QK  (0)*  Adding  together  II  and 
Q  we  get  9'  17°  20; 

10.  Multiply  ibis  sum  by  7,  add  0  to  the  product  if 
the  rising  sign  be  a  moveable  sign  ;  or  substract  9  from  the 
product  if  the  rising  sign  be  a  conmon  one  or  leave  the 
product  as  it  is  if  the  rising  sign  be  a  fixed  one  (a).  Divide 
the  sum  or  the  difference  or  the  product  as  the  case  may  be 
by  27.  The  remainder  will  represent  the  Naksliatra  of  ibo 
querent  at  the  time  of  birth.  By  a  bimilar  process  applied 
to  the  Sphuta  of  the  3rd,  5th,  6tli  and  7th  houses  (^)i  wo 
shall  get  tbcNaksliutras  of  the  querent's  brothorySon,  oaomy 
and  wife. 

Notes* 

(a,)  According  to  Bhatla  Utpala,  if  the  rising  Drekkana 
he  the  first  Drekkana  of  the  fiign,  9  is  to  be  added;  if  it  be  the 
2nd,  0  need  neither  be  added  to  nor  subtracted  from  the  producto 
and  if  it  bo  the  3rd,  0  is  to  be  enbtracted  from  the  product. 

(6.  If  you  add  2  signs  to  the  Lagna  sphnta,  yon  get  the 
sphuta  of  the  3rd  liouse  which  represents  a  person's  brother  ;  if 
you  add  4  signs  to  the  Lagna  sphuta,  yon  get  tho  sphuta  of  the 
5th  house  which  represents  a  person's  son;  if  you  add  5  signs  to 
the  L  igna  sphuta  you  get  the  sphuta  of  the  Gth  house  which 
represents  a  person's  enemy  and  if  you  add  6  signs  to  the  Lagna 
Fphuta,  you  get  the  sphuta  of  the  7tb  house  which  represents  a 
person's  wife.  Multiply  the  several  sphutaa  by  the  Zodiaoal 
factors  of  the  several  houses  and  by  the  factors  of  the  planets; 
occupying  such  houses,  add  the  products,  multiply  the  suoi 
by  7,  add  or  subtract  9  if  necessary,  divide  the  sum  or  remainder 
by  27,  the  remainder  will  give  you  the  Nakshatra  of  the 
several  persons. 


CH.  26.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  223 

11.  Multiply  the  same  suni  (a)  by  10,  8,  7,  5;  add  or 
Bubstract  9  if  necessary,  as  stated  above ;  <livide  the  result 
by  their  appropriate  numbers, (5)  you  will  obtain  the  year, 
Ritu,  Month,  Lunar  day,  day  Or  night^Nakshatra^the  ghatika 
the  rising  sign  and  the  rising  Navamsa  at  the  time  of  birth. 

Notes.  .  . 

Id  this  and  in  the  following  three  stanzas,  the  anther  states 
another  process  for  discovering  the  year,  month  &o.  of  the  birth 
of  a  person. 

(a*)     The  snm  obtained  at  the  end  of  stanza  9. 

(&.)  These  and  the  procesHi  of  division  will  bu  found  ox- 
plained  in  the  next  three  stanzas. 

12.  From  the  product  of  the  sum  by  10  shall  be  dotier- 
mined  the  year  (age),  Ritu  and  month  of  birth  (a)  ;  and  from 
the  product  of  the  sum  by  8  shall  be  determined  the  Faksha 
(fortnight)  and  Tithi  (lunar  day)  (6).  ^ 

Notes. 

(a.)  This  prodaot  is  the  first  of  the  fuar  products  reforrod 
to  in  the  last  stanza  with  9  added  to  or  subtracted  from  it  if 
necessary.  Divide  the  qnantity  by  120,  the  remainder  will  give 
the  age  of.  the.  person.  .  Divide  the'  same  qnantity  by  G,  the 
remainder  will  give  the  Rita  of  birth  from  :  Sisira.  Divide  the 
same  qnantity. by  2,  the  remainder  will  give  the  first  or  the 
second  month  of  the  Rita.  .  r       . ,     .     . 

(b.)  This  product  is  the  second  of  the  fonr  prod  acts  referred 
to  in  the  last  stanza  with  9  added  or  snbtraoted  if  necessary. 
Divide  this  quantity  by  two,  the  remainder  will  g J ve. the  fortnight 
of  birth.  Divide  the  same  qnantity  by  15,  the  remainder  will 
ffive  the  Innar-day.  .  , . 

.      .   13.'.  Fropa  the  product  of  the  sum  by.?  shall  be  deter- 
.mined  whether  the  birth  occurred  by  d^y  or  by  ^nighi,.aQd 

» 

also  the  Nakshatra,  i^     '•;;  •      n"  .•i»-*r  i  <  , 


X 


'^^4i  BRIHAT   JATAKA,  [CH.    26, 

Notes. 

'  TIlia  prodaoi  is  tYie  Srd  of  the  four  prodacfs  mentioned  in 
the  11th  i»tansB.%  with  9  Added  or  subtracted  if  necessary.  Divide 
the  quantity  by  2,  the  birth  will  have  oocnrrod  by  day  or  night 
according  as  the  remainder  is. one  or  more  than  one.  Divide  the 
eame  quantity  by  27,  the  remainder  will  give  the  Nakshatra  from 
Aswini. 

14.  From  the  product  of  the  Sum  by  5  shall  be  deter- 
mined the  Qhatika^  the  rising  sign^  the  Horn  and  the  rising 
Navauisa  at  the  time  of  birth. 

'      Notes. 

This  product  is  the  last  of  the  four  products  mentioned  in 
stanza  11  with  9  added  or  substrnoted  if  necessary.  Divide  the 
quantity  by  the  number  of  Qhaiikas  in  the  day  or  night  of  birth 
as  the  case  may  be,  the  remainder  will  give  the  Qhatika  from 
Suu-rise  or  Sun-set  at  the  time  of  birth.  Divide  the  same 
quantity  by  12,  the  remainder  will  give  the  rising  figu  from 
Aries.  Divide  the  quantity  by  two,  the  hora  of  birth  will  be '  the 
1st  or  2nd  according  as  the  i*emainder  is  1  or  more  than  1.  Divide 
the  quantity  by  9,  the  .  remainder  will  give  the  number  of 
the  rising  Navamsa  from  the  6rst  Navamsa  of  the  ribing  sign. 

Similarly  divide  the  quantity  by  12,  the  remainder  will  give 
the  number  of  the  rising  Dwadasamsa  ;  divide  the  quantity  by 
8j  the  remainder  will  give  the  rising  Drekkana. 

.  N.  B. — In  all  the  above  cases,  it  is  evident  that  the  remain- 
der will  be  in  the  shape  of  signs,  degrees  and  minutes.  The 
unmber  representing  the  Biigns,  is  the  number  representing  the 
particular  Nakshatra,  year,  month,  Pakaha,  Tithi,  Ohatika&o 
at  the  time  of  birth — the  degrees  and  minutes  only  go  to  increase 
the  number  by  unity. 

15.  Multiply  by  two  the  number  of  Matras  in  a 
person's  name  ;  add  the  length  of  shadow  to  it  >  divide  the 
sum  by  27  ;  the  remainder  will  give  the  Nakshatra^  at  the 
time  of  birthj  from  Dhanishta. 


€H.    27.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  225 

Notes. 

The  Dame  is  the  name  given  to  a  person  at  the  Namakarana 
ceremony.  A  short  vowel  soand  is  oonnted  as  one  Matra  and'a 
long  Towel  sonnd  is  counted  as  two,  and  a  coDSonent  is  counted 
as  half  a  Matra.  The  length  of  the  shadow  of  a  twelve  inch 
8ankn  shall  be  added  in  inches. 

1^.     The  Dik   numbers  are  t 


East 

2 

West 

]5 

S.  East 

3 

N.  West 

21 

Soiitb 

14 

North 

9 

S.  West 

10 

N.  East 

8 

Multiply  by  15  the  number  for  the  Dik  or  direction  which 
the  querent  fuces  ;  add  to  the  product  the  number  of  persons 
facing  the  same  dik^  divide  the  sum  by  27  The  remainder 
will  give  the  Nakshatra  of  the  person  from  Dhanishta. 

Notes. 

This  stanza  contains  another  process  again  to  discover  the 
Nakshatra. 

17.  Thus  has  been  stated  by  me  various  processes  for 
the  construction  of  a  lost  horoscope.  Intelligent  pupils  shall 
study  them  carefully  and  use  them. 


CHAPTER  XZVII. 
On   The    Drekkanas. 

1.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Aries  is  a  man  with  a 
white  cloth  tied  round  his  loins,  blacky  facing  a  person  as  if 
able  to  protect  him,  of  fearful  appearance  and  of  red  eyes 
and  holding  an  axe  in  his  hand. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of    the    shape  of  a  man  and  is  armed. 
Mars  is  its  lord. 


226  onmAT  jataka.  [cb.  27. 

2.  According  to  Yavanachariar  the  2nd  Drekkana  of 
sign  Arios  is  a  woman  fond  of  ornaments  (ind  sweetmeats ; 
with  a  pot-like  belly,  of  tho  face  of  a  horse,  tliirsty^  and 
single-legged. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman  and  of  a  quadra- 
ped  ;  the  face  resembles  that  of  a  bird  also.     The  Sau  is  its  lord . 

3.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  Aries  is  a  man  of  a  wicked 
nature,  learned  in  the  arts,  of  a  brown  color,  fond  of  work, 
failing  in  his  attempts  to  carry  out  a  work,  holding  up  a 
stick  in  his  hand,  dressed  in  a  red  garment  and  angry. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man  and  is  armed 
Japiter  is  its  lord. 

4.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  Sign  Taurus  is  a  woman 
with  hairs  cat  and  growing  in  curls,  with  a  pot-like  belly, 
dressed  in  a  burnt  garment,  thirsty,  and  fond  of  food  and 
ornaments; 

Notes.  . 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman  and  carries  fire. 
Venus  is  its  lord. 

5.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Ti*.urus  is  a  man  skilled 
in  works  connected  with  agriculture,  grain,  house,  cows, 
music,  dance,  painting,  writing  and  the  like,  skilled  at  the 
plough  and  in  works  connected  with  a  conveyance,  with  a 
neck  bent  like  that  of  the  bullock,  thirsty,  with  a  face  like 
that  of  the  ram  and  dressed  in   dirty  garments. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  both  a  man  and  a  quadru- 
ped.    Mercury  is  its  lord. 

6.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Taurus  is  a  man  with  a 
body  resembling  that  of  an  elephant,  with  large  teeth,  with 


CH.  27.]  BRIUAT  JATAK.  227 

feet  resembling  those  of  the  camel,  of  a  brown  color,  attached 
to  the  ram  and  to  the  animals  of  the  forest. 

Notes. 

This  DrekkaDa  is  both  of  human  and  qaadroped  shape.  Saturn 
is  its  lord. 

7*  The  IstDrekkana  of  sign  Qemini  is  a  woman  fond  of 
needle  work,  beautiful,  fond  of  decoration,  without  childreui 
with  raised  hands,  having  attained  puberty  and  full  of  lust- 
ful thoughts. 

Notes- 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman.  Mercury  is  its 
lord.-  •  •  ■  •  •  ■,..:,,■. 

8.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Getnini!  is  It  man  reside 
ing  in  a  flower  garden,  wearing  a  mail  coat,  holding  a  bow  in 
his  handj  fond  of  fight,  carrying  arrows^  his  face  like  that  of 
a  Garuda  (Brahmani  kite)^  his  thoughts  directed  to  play , 
children,  ornaments  and  wealth. 

Notes 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man  and  is  armed.  It  is 
also  of  the  shape  of  a  bird.     Venus  is  its  lord. 

9.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Gemini  is  a  man  wearing 
ornaments,  possesing  many  gems,  wearing  a  mRil  coat  and  tar- 
get, carrying  a  bow  in  his  hand^  learned  in  all  the  arts  and 
a  literary  writer. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man  and  is  nrniecl . 
Saturn  is  its  lord. 

10*  The  IstDrekkana  of  Cancer  carries  leaves,  roots 
and  fruits,  has  a  body  resembling  that  of  the  elephant  ; 
lives  in  a  forest  near  sandal  trees,  has  feet  as  large  as  that  of 
the  camelj  has  a  face  like  that  of  the  hog  and  a  neck  like 
that  of  a  horse. 


228  BKIHAT  JATACA.  [Ofl.  27. 

r  Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  qnadrnped.  The  Moon 
is  its  lord. 

11.  The  2iid  Drekkana  of  sign  Caaoor  is  a  woman 
wearing  in  her  head  lotas  flowers>  carrying  a  snake,  hard- 
beartedj  young,  crying  in  a  forest  and  holding  a  branch  of 

the  Palasa  tree  in  her  hand. 

Notes. 
This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman.  Mars  is  its   lord. 

12.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Cancer  is  a  man  sur- 
rounded by  a  snake^  sailing  in  a  boat  in  the  sea  on  account 
of  procuring  ornaments  for  his  wife,  wearing  ornaments 
made  of  gold  and  with  a  flat  face* 

Notes. 

■ 

This  Drekkana  is  one  of  the  shape  <>f  a  man  and  a  snake. 
Jopiter  is  its  lord. 

13.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Loo  is  of  the  shape  of  a 
vulture  and  a  jackalj  seated  on  the  top  of  Salmali  tree,  resem- 
bling a  dog  in  appearance  and  is  also  of  the  shape  of  a  man 
dressed  in  dirty  garments  and  separted  from  his  parents 
and  crying  aloud. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man,  a  quadruped  and  a 
bird.     Tlie  San  is  its  lord. 

14-  The  2ndtDrakkana  of  sign  Leo  is  a  man  of  the  shape 
of  a  horso,  wearing  a  slio^htly  white  garland  of  flowers 
in  the  head  and  covered  with  deer-skin  and  flannel,  unapproa- 
chable like  the  lion  holding  a  bow  in  his  hand  and  with  a 
a  bent  nose. 

Notes, 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man  and  is  armed.  Japitec 
is  its  lord. 


OH.   27.]  BBlHAT  JkTAtki  '  229 

15.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  Leo  is  a  man  with  the  face 
of  a  bear,  the  pranks  of  a  monkey,  'with  a  clab  in  his  hand 
carrying  fruits  and  meats,  with  a  long  beard  and  whiskers 
and  with  curling  hairs*  . 

Notes.  ' 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man  and  a  qnadrnped 
and  is  armed.     Mars  is  its  lord. 

16.  The  Ist  Drekkana  of  S'gn  Virgo  is  a  Virgin  girl 
carrying  a  pot  filled  with  flowers,  dressed  in  dirty  garments 

•  •  •    • 

and  fond  of  cloths   and  wealth  and  proceeding  to  the  house 
of  her  preceptor. 

Notes. 


( 


This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman*  Mercury  is 
its  lord, 

,  17.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Virgo  is  a  man  holding 
a  pen  in  his  hand,  black,  with  a  cloth  tied  round  his. head, 
examining  items  of  receipt  and  expenditure,  with  a   large 

bow  in  his  hand  and  covered  with  hairs  all  ovenhis  body. 

•  ■  ' •  ,    ■  •  ,<f  r     '   •     '       •  ■        .  -     . 

Notes. 

■  >  -  f  »  . 

r. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man  and  is  armed.  Sa- 
turn  is  its  lord, 

18.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Virgo  is  a  woman  of 
yellow  color,  dressed  in  white  silk  carrying  a  pot  and  ladle 
in  her  hands,  pure  and  proceeding  to  a  temple.   ; 


t    r 


Notes. 

r  .  .        .  •  . 

This  Drekkana  16  of  the  shape  of  a  woman*  Venas  is  its  lord. 

'  )  I  •  ■  ■      ■      .  ' 

19.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Libra  is  a  man  hold- 
ing  a  balance  in  one  hand,  skilled  in  weighing  and  measur- 
ing, with  articles  in  his  hand  to  be  weighed  or  measured  and 
with  his  thoughts  directed  to  the  determination  of  the 
price  of  such  articles. 


;230  9BIHAT  JAT.4KA.  [oH,  27* 

I'iij;  This  Drekkanais  of  tb«  shape  of  a  man*.  Yen  as  is  its  lord. 

20.  I'he  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Libra  is  a  man  with  the 
face  of  a  yoUurej  holding  a  pot  in  his  hand>  wishing  to  fall 
down^j  suffering  from  hunger  and  thirst  and  with  his 
thoughts  directed  to  his  wife  and.  children. 

Notes* 

This  Prekkaua  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man  and  a  bird.  Satarn  is 

its  lord. 

•  ■ 

21 .  The  3rd  Drekki^na  of  sign  Libra  is  a  man  with  the 
face  of  a  horse  adorned  with  gems>  scaring  animals  in  the 
woods  caiTying  a  golden  quiver  and  wearing  a  mail  coat, 
carrying  fruits  and  meat,  monkey-like  in  appearence  and 
holding  a  bow  in  his    hand. 

Notes. 

f 

This  Drekkanais  of  the  shape  o(^  Dian  and  a  quadruped. Mer- 
cury is  its  lord. 

22.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Scorpio  is  a  beautiful 
woman,  naked  and  without  ornaments,  quitting  her  place, 
lauding  after  a  long  sea  yo}'age  and  with  a  snake  coilod 
round  her  legs- 

,  . :.  Notes.  •        . 

'  •  •    •   •  •     •  .  .  . 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman  aud    a  serpent* 

Mara  is  its  loid.  .      .    ■.  u;  -    :       .' 

•  *> 

23.  The  2ud  Drekkana  of  Scorpio  is  a  woman  with  a 
body  like  that  of  a  turtle  or  pot,  desiring  the  comfort  of  her 
plaop  and  with  a  Gierpent  coiled  round  her  body  on  account, 
of  her  husbaihd. 


•    •  % «  • . 


•  •  •  * 


i  i  1  ;        »  Af. 


.<  • 


r  , 


!».;,)  i 'O  I  ;r    .-i.        .   ;    l^^.i,:'  J  7/   :.k1 


Notes. 


..[j   This^.DrekljLu^  Isjof  th^  shape  ofi^womaa  and  a sirpeiit. 
Jupiter  is  its  lord. 


OH.  27.]  BBIHAT   JATAKA.  231 

'  24.  The  'Srd  Drekkana  of  sigti  Scorpio  is  a  lion  with  a 
broad  and  a  flak  face  like  thab  of  a  turtle,  scaring  dogs^ 
deer,  jackals  and  hogs  in  the  woods  and  lording  over  a  couu- 
try  abounding  iii    sandal  trees* 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  quadraped.  Tbo  Mooa  is 
its  lord. 

25.  The  Isi  Drekkana  of  sign  Sagittari  is  a  maa  with 
the  body  of  ahorse^  with  a  long  bow  in  his  haud^  stopping 
in  his  hermitage  and  watching  over  the  several  articles  re- 
quired for  Sncrificial  rites. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  fcho  Hhfipe  of  a  man  and  a  qtiadropcd  and 
is  armed.     Jupiter  is  ita  lord. 

26.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Sagittari  is  a  beautifnl 

woman,  bright  as  gold  and  the  Champa ka   flower^  seated  on 

a  throne  of  middle  size,    and  picking  up  the    gems    of  the 

Sea* 

Notes. 

This  Drekkfina  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman.  Mars  is  its  lord. 

27.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  Sagittari  is  a  man  with  a 
long  beard  and  whiekers,  of  the  color  of  gold  and  the  cham- 
paka  flower^  seated  on  a  throne  with  a  club  in  his  hand  and 
dressed  in  white  silk  and  dear  skin' 

Notes. 
Thitf  Drekkauna  is  of  tho  shape  of  a  man  and  is  armed.  The 
Snu  is  its    lord. 

28.  The  first    Drekkana  of  sign    Capricorn  is  a   man 

coverd  with  hairs^  strong  as  the  sea   monster,  with  a  body 

like  that  of  a  hog^  wearing  a  nose   string  and    fetters  and 

with  a  deformed  faco. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  tho  shape  of  a  man  leaded  with  fetters. 

Saturn  is  its  lord- 

F 


232  BRIIlATfjATAKA.  [CH.  27- 

29.  The  2ud  Drekkana  of  sign  Capricorn  is  a  woman 
skilled  in  the  arts^  with  eyes  like  the  petals  of  the  lotus » 
blacky  hankering  after  various  things  and  wearing  ear- 
ornaments  made  of  iron* 

Notes. 
Tbia  Drekkna  is  of  the    shape  of  a    woman.  -Venus  is  its  lord. 

80.  Tne  8rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Capricorn  is  of  the  shape 
of  a  Kinuara  (acelestial  being)  covered  with  flannelj  with  a 
a  quiver,  a  bow  and  a  mail  coat  and  carrying  on  his  should- 
ers a  pot  set  with  precious  stones. 

Notes. 

Tbia  Drekkaua  is  armed.  Mercury  is  its  lord. 

31.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Aqaaiins  is  a  man  with 
tho  face  of  a  vulture,  with  his  thoughts  directed  towards  the 
gain  of  oil,  liquor,  water,  and  meals  and  dressed  in  flannel, 
silk  and  deer  skin^ 

Notes. 
This  Drekkaua  is  of  the  shape  of  a  man.     Saturn  is  its  lord. 

32.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Aquarius  is  a  woman  in 
a  car  burnt  with  the  wood  of  Salmali  in  it  and  collecting 
iron,  living  iu  a  forest  and  dressed  in  dirty  garments. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman  who  carries  fire. 
Mercury  is  ita  lord. 

S3.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Aquarius  is  a  black  man, 
with  hairs  in  his  ear,  wearing  a  crown  and  carrying  barki 
leaves^  the  oil  of  bdellium^  iron  and  pots  from  one  place  to 
another. 

Notes. 
Tbia  Drekkaua  is  of  the  ahape  of  a  man.  Ye  nus   is  its  lord 

St,  The  Ist  Drekkana  of  Sigu  Pisces  is  a  man  with 
tho  vessels  of  sacrificial  rites,  pots,  pearls,  goms  and   conch 


CH.  28.]  BBIHAT    JATAKA.  283 

shells  in  his  hands^  carrying  ornamentes  and  sailing  in  a  boat 
iu  tho  sea  for  the  purpose  of  decorating  his  i^ife. 

« 

Notes. 

Jnpiter  is  the  lord  of  this  Drekkana. 

25.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Pisces  is  a  woman  with 
a  long  flag-stafiE  and  banner^  sailing  in  a  boat  to  the' other 
shore  of  the  sea  accompanied  by  her  friends  and  with  a  face 
bright  as  the  Champaka  flower. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  woman.  The  Moon  is  its 
lord- 

36.    The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Pisces  is  a  man  with 
a  snake  coiled  round  him^  standing  naked  on  the  brink  of 
a  pit  in  a  forest^  suffering  from  thieves,  from  fire  and  from 
hunger  and  weeping. 

Notes, 
This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a  snake.     Mars  is  its  lord- 


Notes. — Theaathor  has  stated  the  use  of  these  descriptions 
of  the  Drekkanas  iu  his  Yatra.  If  the  Drekkana  be  of  agreeable 
appearance^  carrying  fruits,  flowers^  gems  and  pots  and  aspected 
by  benefic  planets,  there  will  be  success.  If  they  be  of  hideous 
appearance,  armed  and  aspected  by  malefic  planets,  there  will  be 
disgrace  and  failure  ;  if  they  carry  serpents  or  fetters  there  will  be 
delirium  and  imprisonment.  The  Drekkana  description  is  also  of 
use  in  tracing  out  theives  according  to  Prithnyasas,  son  of 
Varaha  Mihira,  iu  his  Sbadpauchasika,  a  work  on  Horary  As- 
trology. 


CHAPTER  XXVIir. 
Conclusion. 

1,  2  &  8.     In  my  work    on  Jataka  I  have   treated  of  the 
following. 


234  UUIUAT  JAT&KA.  [O0«  27. 

1.  Definitions  and  iBlomontary  principles']  (Zodiacal) 

2.  Do  Do  Do  (Planetary) 

3.  On  Animal  and  Vegetable  HoroBCopy. 

4.  Oil  Nishoka  kala  or  the  time  of  conception  . 

5.  On  MiiUers  connected  with  birth  time. 

6.  On  JBalarishta  or  Early  death. 

?.     On    Ayurdaja  or     the   determination    of  length  of  lifo. 
8.     On  Planetaay  divisions  and  sub-divisions  of  life  known 

ns  Dasas  and  Autardasas. 

9.     On  Ashtakavargaa. 

10.  On  Avocation.  . 

11.  On  Raja   yoga  or  the  birth  of  kings. 

12.  Ou  Nabliasa^yogas. . 

13.  On  Chandra  or  lunar  Yogas. 

14.  On  Double  planetary    Yogaa. 
15*  On  Ascetic  Yogas. 

IG.     On  the  Nakshatras  or  the  Moon  in  the  asterisms. 
1 7.     On  the  Moon  in  the  several  signs  of  the  Zodiao» 

15.  On  the   Sun,   Mars  and   other  planets  in  the     seyeral 
signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

19.  Ou  planetary  aspects- 

20.  On  the  planets  in  the  Bhavas. 

21.  On  the  planets  in  their  several  Vargas. 

22.  On  MiBcoUaneons  Yogas- 

23.  On  Mak-fio  Yogas. 

24.  Ou  the  Horscopy  of  women. 
25  On  Death- 

26.  On  the  Discovery  of  a  lost  Horoscopo- 

27.  On  the  Drekkanas. 

I  shall  now  give  a   summary  of  the  subjects  treated  of 

in  my  work  on  Yatra. 

4,  5  &  6. 

Ch  1.     Prasna  Prabheda. 

2.  Tithibala.    • 

3.  Nak:ihat.rabhidhana- 


OH.  28.]  BRIEAT  JATAKA.  235 

4,  Varaphala. 

5.  Mahnrta  Nirdesa. 
G.     Chandra  Bala. 

7.  Lagna  Nischaya^ 

8«  Lagna  Bheda* 

9.  GraliaBQdhi. 

1 0.  Apavada' 

11*  Misraka* 

12.  Tanuvepana. 

J  3-  Gabyakapuja- 

14.  Swapnadfiyaja*  (Dreamn) 

15.  Suanavidhi.  (batb) 

16.  Grabajajna. 

•     17.  Prayana.  (Travels) 

18.  Sakanarata. 

19.  Vivabakala- 

20.  Grabakarana.  (on  tbe  planets) 

The  lasfc  of  the  above  subjects  has  been  separately 
treated  of  by  me  in  my  Astronomical  work  known  as  Pancha- 
sindbanta.  Thus  the  three  branches  of  the  Jyotisha  Sastra 
viz  Astronomy,  Horoscopy  and  Samhita  have  been  treated 
of  by  mo  for  the  benefit  of  intelligent  students. 

7.  These  brief  works  have  been  written  by  me  on  a 
full  study  and  examination  of  the  elaborate  works  of  the  an- 
cient writers.  If  any  important  points  be  found  omitted 
I  crave  the  forbearance  of  the  learned  critics. 

8.  If  any  portion  of  the  text  be  found  omitted  by  the 
writer  who  copied  or  the  teacher  who  taught,  the  learned 
will  kindly  supply  the  omission,  setting  aside  all  feelings  of 
jealousy-  Again,  if  there  be  found  in  the  text  errors,  im- 
perfections or  omissions,  the  learned  will  kindly  make  the 
necessav}^  corrections  and  supply  what  is  wanted. 

9.  Varaha  Mihira,  the  son^of  the  Brahmin  Aditya- 
dasa  from  whom  he  received  his  education,  obtained  the 
boon  of  knowledge  from  the  Sun  in  the  village  of  Kapitha, 


236  BRinAT  JATVKA.  [OH.  28. 

spent  his  days  in  the  court  of  UjJHyani  in  the  province  of 
Avanti  and  has  written  this  neat  work  on  horoscopy  after 
a  careful  examination  of  the  works  of  the  ancient  sages  on 
the  snbject. 

10.  I  have  been  enabled  to  write  the' present  work  by 
the  the  grace  of  the  Sun,  of  Vasishtha^  andot  Adityadasa^ 
worshipped  by  me.  Salutation  to  the  ancient  writers  of 
horoscopy. 


END. 


»>:• 


Bequired  the  Laprna  Spbutam,  that  is>  ilie  Longitade 
of  the  Asoendant  at  39  gh.  dOv.  gh.  from  Sunrise  on  ifriday 
the  28th  May  1886,  for  a  place  whose.Lj^titude  is    !!•, 

,  From  the  Almanac  we  find  that  the  San;entered  Tau- 
rus at  66  gh.  40v.  gh.  on  the  12th  May,  and  quits  the  sign 
at  12.  gh  277.  gh.  on  the  IBth  June.  Therefore  time  taken 
by  the  Sun  to  move  through   sign  Taurus 

=  8  gh.  20v.  gh.4-^1  days +  12  gh.  27 v.  gh. 

=  31  days  15  gh.  47 v.  gh.  =  1,12,5007.  ghs. 

Time  from  Sun-rise  on  the  28th  May  to  the  end  of  the 
Sun's  course  through  Taurus    =  I6ds  12  gh.  277.  gh. 

=  58,32 7 V.  ghs. 

Time  of  oblique  ascension  of  >    =  5  gh.  67.  gh. 
Taurus  for  Latitude  11*  >    =  8O67.  gh. 

Therefore  time  of  oWique   ascension  of  the  portion  cf 
Taurus  to  be  passed  07er  by  the  Sun  on  the  morning  of  the 
306X58,327 

28th  = =  2gh.  397.  gh. 

1,12.500 

Subtracting  this  from  39gh.  307.  gh*  we  get  time  of 
oblique  ascension  of  signs  from  Gemioi  =  89- gh.  307.  gh 
— 2  gh.  897.  gh  =  30  gh.  olv.  gh. 

From  Table  B  we  find  that  time  of  oblique  ascension 
of  signs  for  Gemioito  Scorpio  =  81  gh.  067.  gh. 

Therefore  time  of  oblique  ascension  of  portion  Sagit- 
tari  that   has  risen   abo7e  the  horizon. 

=  36  gh.  5l7,  gh.— 31  gh.  36v.  gh. 
=     5  gh.  157.  gh.  =  315v.  gh. 

Time  of  oblique  ascension  of  the  80  degrees  of  sagit- 
tari  for  Latitude  11%  is  5  gh.  2I7.  gh.  (Vide  Table  A) 
=  321v.  gh. 

Therefore  portion  of  Sagittari  that  [has  risen  abo7e  the 
30X315 

horizon  = ..  =  29*  26^  Sagittari   being  the  9th   sign 

o21 
from  Aries, 

Lagna  Sphutam  required  is  8'  29*  26^ 
The  Bha7asphutam  process  is   too    comph'oatec)  to    be  gt76n 
here.  The  Reader  is  referred  to    Baskai*acharya's  work  en 
Astronomy. 


II 


CO 

a  •    •  • 

•2  ^  S 

•Si  ^  ^ 

^  ^  II 

35:  ^  '5J 

-S5:  t^  "*5 

•I  S"  § 

S  ^  ^ 

S  ^  .5 

^  '*^  <N 

^  ^  -C: 

-^  .-5  ^ 

I  -s  ^ 


-Jtll 

OrHe^OO^UdCOt^aOOdOi-^oqeO^IOCOt^OOO) 

• 

n 

8 

(In 

• 
• 

00  03  OO  eO  C^  ei  04  G4  d  iH  r-4  iH  i-<  iH                           »0  »<» 

Aqua- 
rins. 

• 

> 

• 

-V  ^  CO  eOCO  eO  CO  W  0Q©<  ©^NiH  fH  iH  rHrH 

Capri- 
ooru. 

• 

> 

• 

^eC09r-l0^i>-50kAeOo:|00)C»^kOOOrHQOOCO 
Ud40U3tOlOkOiO^^^<«|i<«7^^CO 

Ud  UdUd  US  ^  "^ 

•a 

CO 

• 
• 

»0»O^Tjt'<ft  ^COCOOOC4ev|r^iHiHOOO»0»aO'>^ 
U3U3 

• 

o 

1 

• 
• 

t^ooa)Of-ioi«o-«ud<oi>.ooo>0'-^99eo^ioi>> 

iH— rHOlOlC4O|O109Oie909C4C0C0CO00e000C0 

i 

• 
• 

cotoi^ooooi^c0Qoa»iHcoudr^a»iH»i'«i««oQO 

iOkOUdUd                                         r-4  rrl  r-l  r-i  iH  Ol  01  Ol  04  09 

^  "^  ■^  "^  U3  U5 

• 

o 

> 

• 
• 

t^0>r-lCO\Ol^O>f-4COudt>OC^^ttQOOOOUdl>. 

• 

o 

C9 

0g*Qt5gii-»C0U3t*O>i-4C0»Ofc^W»-lC0<O00Q©1 
•*'*'*'*  U5  U3  U5  »0  U5                                   f-1  i-H  i-H  rH  C4  01 

• 

u 
o 

• 

d 

W5f000J-«e0'*»Ofc^00OrHC0'H<»0t^0>O«M-»f( 
r-lr-lr-lHrHr->OIC<S4e)C4CIO1000300 

UdUd 

• 

.s 

6 

• 
• 

OO|01<MC401C4M01010401Ol09050d03030300 

iOUd 

• 

1 

• 
• 

t<«cou3^COe4r-iOO)OOt^COkO^COG^r-(Oa)l>* 
fH  r-l  r-l  r-i  H  P-t  f-4  rH                                                                  io  lO 

UdlO                                                                                           lOkO'^  ^ 

i 
■3 

• 

> 

• 

coiHo>qo^'*»<«oooi>waooi-<git^iO'^oiooo 

•i«q 

Or-l»1C0^lO;0t^000)Or-iOlC0'^U3«0t«Q'>0» 

rH«-(iHP-irHP-lr-lr-lr-lr-( 

Ill 


to  lO  <qi  -^  '^ '^  ^  CO  CO  00  09  04  09  Ol  r-l  iH  iH         >0  tO  Ud -^  -^  03  09  Od  09  64  rH  •H 


00  03 


00  03  04  64 


04  04 


e40>t^t(3  0lOl>U300QC«U3e40»CD030t^'^«-ia0^fHt^eOG!>'^QU30lAOU3 
•O  U3  U3U3\0  ^  ^ -^  ^  00  03  03  04  04  01  04  r-t  <H  1-4         U3  U3  ^  ^  ^  03  CO  09  04  «-l 


^  CO  OS 


03  00  04  04 


04  04 


ioeo«>'Oaoc&<^o9poot«'^oi090u3030oou3e40>b»^i-it^<^ot^eoaooooo 

03  CO  03  CO  09  CM  09  Gl  C4  rH  iH  rH  r-i  fH  S»  U3  U3  ^  '^  ^  "^  00  03  00  CS|  09  vH  iH 


^  ^  03  03 


00  00 


l>t^t«COeOCOU3U3^'<9eOC00404r-4<HOOa)0>aO^COU3^'^030400>OOto<D 
•-ii-«i-lrHr-liHiHiH»-<r-lr-liHrHiHi-4iHtHiH  U3U3U3U3 


U3  V3<^  "^  <f  ^ 


f^O>QiHOi03"*<OI>OOOiHOO^COt*0>004^ 
0300^^-4<Tf<Ml'^^'^^U3U3U3U3U3kO 


V3U3  CD<0 


00009<^CDO>e9U3aO>-i4'«flQO 
iHr-li-HiHt-40404e4O3O300 


COCO 


804'^t^0»«-l00V3t>O04M3r»O03k0a0<H«^t«O00t«rHU30d04CQi-4U3OC0<--l 
03  03  00  00 -^  ^  ^ -^  W3U3  U3  M3  tH  iH  (-t  04  09  09  03  03  00  '^  ^  U3  lO      iH 


U3  U3  CO  CO 


CO  coi>i>»  r^ 


O04tOt>0)09'^t<>QC4U3a0O00CQO00C00>C0C0O'<^t«iHU3Q^aQ030000a0 
04  04  09  04  Ol  CO  CO  00^ '^  ^^  U3  lO  id  pH  tH  M  09  09  00  03  ^  ^  -^  K>  U3 


\o\o  coco 


CO  COb<»t> 


^t^O>'-4^COOdr-l03CQa>rH^t^OOOCOO>04U3XfflU30>COt«e4CO-4COTHCOr-4 
09  04  CI  00  m  00  00 '^ -<ji  ^  <^  U3  «0  U3  fH  rH  rH  C4  09  09  CO  00 '^ -^  U3  »0  r-i 


U3%OCO  CO 


COCO  t^l>t> 


USt<>0>Qe4'<9COap00400COQ0009U3fc«009U3aOrHeOCOO)OOCOQeOt^04t«>04 
CQ03CO^^'^^^U3U3USU3IO  iHr-if-it-lC9O909&100CO^^-^UdU3 


«OU3  COCO 


COCOI> 


0303CO^^'^>OUdCOCOt«t«Qnora)a)QQiHf-(e4eO'il«QCQCOt29QO'^0400'^ 

ooo3ooeomeooocoooeoooo3oooocooo^^'<^^-^ii^'^^^^^^u3U3u3U3io 


U3U3 


COU3'^C009r-IOapl>CO^OOHOQOb*ttd'^C9QaOCO-«040aOU3090>C0030CP 
kO  U3  lO  U3  U3  U3  «0  ^  <<9  ^  <4I  ^  "tr  ^  m  CO  CO  CO  00  eO  04  09  04  09  09  (H  i-t  iH  >0 


'<9'^C9 


CO^C40>|>U3eOfHgCO 
^  ^  CO  00 

U3  to  -^ 

^ 

COfHaOud090»COOOO)U3fHt^^0^i-«COQt6 
'<4* -^  eO  00  CO  04  09  09  '-^  iH  i-l                    U3  U3  ^  ^  03 

• 
CO  00  04  04  04  04  04 

O  1-1 
09  04 

^ 

00  ^  ud  CO  t«ao  a> 

09  C4  04  09  04  09  04 

O  ^  04 
CO  CO  CO 

SI 

cocoooooeoeo^^f 

35« 

$^93S 

U3  to 

IV. 


CO 


C3 


.1. 

IS: 


^ 


Co 


<3Q 


CO 


Jt3 


CO 


^       C5J 
.CO     ^ 


Co 


o 


S 

00 


00 


•C  a 

"IT" 


& 

o 
o 
02 


i 


t 

^ 


o 

3 


S 


3 

0 

& 


00 


B 

o 


• 

> 

°assss8s«sj§3 

m 

O 

sssussssas*" 

• 

^  tH         CO  r-l  iH  ^  lO  CO  i-H  C9 

• 

P? 

MdeqC£t^C0tHr-ia0O3)OA 
0<  »0  <*  i-ilO  lO  U3  CO  1-1  ^        CO 

• 

U3  ^  r<«  tC  00  Ol  »|  1-1  i-i        <0k<» 

• 

(CC0l»Xt^e(19l0)'HOr-lO 
€0        »0  C>l                    <^  CI        iH  Ud 

• 

"^  "^  00  09  d  CI  tH  rH        ®  Ud  ip 

• 

iH  1*1  CO         ^  ^  "*  ©<         09  lO  CI 

• 

'^  00  00  C9  CI  pH  iH         COIO'V^ 

• 

> 

t*'«*OOOOOOOeOOCIr-«5«»H 
"^fi  iH         GO  r^  ^  iH         00  H  C« 

•  • 

a 

CO  OO  CI  CI  f-l  iH        CO  to  ^  "^l  9 

• 

> 

S'^g§'*'®®5;a2*5 

.5?L 

> 


e. 


SCOOiOO>OQ«aO>000»^ 
d  d  r-l  rl        ©  ■ 


lo  Th  ^  00  00 


•^  fH  U3 

00   to 


CO  lO  o  O  l> 


O)  00  o  op 

i-i  kO    ^ 


Ud  iH  \0 

CI  CI  ri 


O  to  O  tOOd 
rH   O  to  <^ 


^ 


00  ^  o> 

CO  00  CI 


oco  o 

CI  to  lO 

o  to  o 
CI  —  »-« 


rH  O  to  to  O 
d    to  to  Tft 


**83?S 


^  00  ^ 
I-i  to 


s? 


0>  00  O)  ^ 

00  oa  CI  d 


X  to  O) 
00  d 


U3  O  to 


O  Oi  'il  ^  fH  ., 
00  CO  CO  C9  lO  00 


00  CI  00  Ol 

"  tF  »i 


S-*  ^  5J05 
to  -*  «*  00 


00  00  CO  A 
CO  dd  r-« 


a>coor!«otOkOd^oO'^oo 

COtO^^OOCOddrnlH 


CO  CO  •-« 

0)tOO  ^O) 


to  d         I-i  lO 

O)  00  00  00  X  oo 


00  oH'to'vf^oicooot^act^- 

CO         tOd         tOtO'^r-itO        ^ 


'^Q'<^0)'iiOOoooooot«ecao 

COtO'^^0000Cld>-tr-t 


00 
0) 


00 

a  a 


1 


t:  o  %  o  B 

I  g  H  t-a  §.  i  i 

*  ®  :^  :^  o  rt  c8  cr.a 


HOOt-^^HJGQGQO-^S 


VI 
TO  FIND  OUT  THE  CORRECT  LOCAL  TIME. 


I.    B7  DAT. 


Draw  a  pretty-large  semi-cirole  on  eaoh  side  of  a  well- 
planed  and  smooth  oblongidar  plank.  Place  its  edge  along 
a  straight  line  drawn  east  to  west  on  a  smooth  level  gronnd^ 
the  plank  being  inclined  at  an  angle  with  the  plane  of  the 
horizon^  equal  to  the  complement  of  the  latitude  of  the 
place,  so  that  a  straight  needle  fixed  at  the  centre  of  the 
semi-circle  and  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  plank 
will  point  to  the  Pole  and  the  plane  of  the  plank  will  be 
parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  equator.  The  edge  of  an  ob- 
longnlar  piece  of  wood  placed  at  the  centre  will  serve  as 
well  as  a  needle.  Now  divide  the  semicircle  into  12  equal 
parts,  marking  the  points  of  division  with  the  figures  from 
C  down  to  12  and  from  12  up  to  <».  The  diviwions  repre- 
sent the  hours.  If  the  diameter  be  about  a  cubit  in  length 
each  division  may  further  be  divided  into  <30  or  60  equal 
parts>  so  that  the  position  of  the  shadow  of  the  needle  will 
give  the  time  within  a  minute.  Now  apply  the  equation 
of  time  and  the  result  will  be  the  local  clock  time  or  the 
mean  solar  time  required.  This  can  be  onverted  into 
Ghatikas  and  Yigh.itikas  from  sun  rise  from  the  table 
shewing   the  time  of  sun  rise  for  each  da}^. 

Notes: — (1).  The  latitude  of  the  place  may  be  found 
from  a  pretty  good  Atlas  or  it  may  be  ascertained  by  noting 
the  altitude  of  the  pole-star  both  at  the  time  of  its  culmi- 
n  ition  and  the  time  of  its  depression  and  taking  the  mean* 

(i).  The  complement  of  the  angle  of  latitude  may  be 
marked  on  a  piece  of  solid  wood  and  the  portion  may  be 
cut  out  in  the  shape  of  a  fine  wedgs3  and  made  to  support 
the  plank  of  the  inclined  dial. 

(3)  The  ejist  and  west  line  may  be  marked  pretty 
cerrectly  with  the  help  of  a  mariner's  oompass  or  it  may  be 
fi)und  by  marking  the  two  points  of  contact  of  the  end  o: 
the  shadow  of  a  straight  rod  fixed  vertically  at  the  centre 
of  a  circle  drawn  on  a  smooth^  horizontal  surface^  with  the 
circumference  of  the  circle  both  before  and  after  mid-day 

the  line  joining  the  two  points  being  due  east    and 

west. 

(4).  A  levels  horizontal  ground  may  be  prepared  with 
the  help  of  a  spirit-level. 


VII. 


u 


o 

d 
o 

V 

eB 

d 

o 
.d 

09 

eS 


H 


O 


H 


H 
»« 
H 
00 


H 
00 

S 


P 


SB 


at 


tB 

< 


ea 

H 


EQUATION  OP  TIMB, 


I  + 


•-Hr-ii-i»^rHrHr-<r-ii-li-iiHi-iiHr-ii-ir-lfH»HiHi--ir-lr-lf-»r-lrHrHr-if-irH»H 


I 


W  -^    CI  -^  lO  iH  CO  ""^    1-1  CO  9    1-4  CM  CO  iO    -^  M  eO  00  "^t  U3  lO      r-i  •-•  i-l 
i-*i-^i-Hi-ii-HfHi-4-^— rHi-irHi-ifHp-i-iiHr-ii-Hi-«r-lf-<f-ii-»iHi-ir-iiHi-itH»-« 


I 


goeoq)'^^eot«oeieoTftocoto^eorHQfiM»»ioor30Qcot«M'^i>Oeii'<>««co 

g<0»OU5tOU5IO»0»o»OIO'*'*^'<ily^^^COeOWCO©lC^NCqiHi-liHrHOOO 

+ 


4- 


CMr-l         tO^09<NrH         WbCOCMiH         r-i<MOCU>        i-tCOTPlOe^eO^iHel 
gN<NNMr-liHr^rH,-|OOOOOOOOO»HiH,HiHrHW(Mc4ffl«e0e0 

-J 1  + 


E»cofoeoooeoeo«ooooooeoeoeooo««eoeoweoeo««eccoci9e«ociN« 

I 


u9co<-iu9<4ie4      ■^eo^kO'^G4r-i      •-ieo-^iOr-ie<ic9  9ioi-Heio9eO"^io 
a«ooooNffic«NfH,HfHOooo  oo  oooi-iiHfHiHiHe<ic4eqe(ieQC^ 

+  +1 


gG12C4^^P-li-400000>0>0>0>aCX«Ot>|>^COCOCO(OlOlOlO<^^^ 


«^^  «ioo«oo*»»oi^ooo>oiQOtx-'^i-<i>eoooe«coc&rHcicO'^"*eoe9 

^i-lfHi-lf-lfHrHiHrHfHrHrHi-li-Hr-liHfHrHiHrHrHrHiHiHfHr-l-^r-ir-irH 


CO         eq  lO  O]  lO  r-4 -^         CO  U3  01  <^         Os|  ^  rH  M  ""^         OQ  ^  >0  iH  Oil  t|I  US         1-4  04  m 

BoO'*"*^»oio<c«ot*fc*fc*oooooio&o>ocor-ii-i^i-ie«©iNeiieoeoeoeo 


r-l99CQ^UdCOt«>XO)OrHGi]eO^UdCOI>aOO»Or-ie400^UdCOI>OOa)OiH 

«HpmHiH*HfHr-ii-lfHrHCIC9e3C4me404&IOi|e4C0CO 


vrir. 

II.  AT  NIGHT. 

Attach  equal  weights  to  the   ends  of  a  long  fine   btriug^ 
and  throw  the  string  over  two  fine  metuUic  wires  each  aboat 
a  foot  in  length  fixed  regidly  between    supports  and  at  the 
heiglit  of  about  5  or  o  feet  fronrthe   ground>    running  east 
to  west,  and  about  5  or  6  feet  apart  from  each  other.     Now 
the  twoplnniblinosnre  certainly  vcrticul,and  the  planepass- 
in<if  through  them  will  bo  a  vertical  phine.    This  plane  may 
be  nuide  to  pass  through  the  Pole  star  about  the  time  of  its 
culmination  or  depression  by    slightly    moving    the    string 
over  one  of  the   wires  to  the  east  or  west  till  the  two  plum- 
lines  hide   the    Polo   star  to  an    ob.sor\'or  stationed  2  or  8 
foot  to  the   South  of  the  southern  plumbline  and  ^Jooking 
with  one  eye,  the  other  eye^ being  closed.     We    have    thus 
secured  the  plane  of  the^moridian.     Now    attach    the   ends 
of  a  slightly  tight  string  to  tlie  two  plamblines*  about  their 
middle  points.     The  observer  may  now  lie  down  below,  with 
his  face  turned  up,  the  head  supported  by  a  pillow  and  ono 
eye  plao<Ml  oxaclly  under  the  two  strings  running  north  and 
south  80    that  the  upper  siring  is   wholly   concealed  by  the 
lower  and  observe    the  transit  of  stars    across  the  strings- 
The  Almanac  gives  the  tiuje  of  culmination  of  the  Vernal 
equinox    for   each    day   of  the  year  and  also  the  times  at 
which    })articuhir    stars  culminate    after   the    culmination 
of  the  vernal  equinox.     If  the  two  times  be   added,  we  get 
the    time  of  culmination  of  a  particular  star  from  12  noon 
that   day.     But  if  the   sum  exceed  21  hours  then  subtract 
from  ib  ".^3  hours  and  5G  minutes,  the   remainder  will  be  the 
time  of    culmination  of  the  Star  from  12   noon  that  day. 


IX. 


TABLE  E.  Shewing  (ke  tim€  of  ctdmintiUon  of  ike  Snn  and  the 

Vernal  Eqninog. 


1     ^<an*8    ICnlmiiia- 

Snn'9   2 

Galmtna' 

Month. 

Date.  Icnlmina* 

tionofV. 

Month.       Date. 

calmina* 

tion  of  V. 

1     tkm.     let|Tiii]Ox. 

1 

tion.    ' 

eqninox. 

h. 

m. 

h.       m. 

n.        yn. 

h.        m. 

Jnmtmrj 

i 

12 

4 

6    17 

Jof/ 

6 

13       4 

17       5 

7 

6 

4    53 

12 

5 

16    41 

13 

9 

4    30 

18 

6 

16     17 

19 

11 

4      6 

2i 

6 

15     54 

25 

13 

3    42 

30 

6 

15     30 

31 

14 

3    19 

August 

5 

6 

16       7 

^ebmarj 

6 

14 

2     55 

11 

5 

14    43 

12 

14 

2     32 

17 

4 

14    19 

lb 

14 

2      8 

23 

3 

13     56 

24 

13 

1     44 

29 

12       1 

13     32 

March 

2 

12 

1     21 

September 

4 

11     59 

13       9 

8 

11 

0     57 

10 

57 

12     45 

H 

U 

0     3i 

( 

16 

55 

12     21 

20 

8 

0     10 

22 

53 

11    58 

26 

6 

23    43 

28 

51 

11    a4 

April 

1 

4 

23     19 

October 

4 

49 

11     11 

7 

2 

22     55 

10 

47 

10    47 

13 

12 

1 

22     32 

16 

46 

10     23 

19 

11 

59 

23     11 

22 

45 

10      0 

25 

58 

21     47 

28 

44 

9    36 

Ms7 

1 

67 

21     24 

3 

44 

9     13 

7 

56 

21     .0 

9 

44 

8     49 

13 

66 

20    37 

15 

45 

8    26 

19 

66 

20     13 

21 

46 

8       2 

25 

67 

19     60 

27 

47 

7     38 

31 

57 

19    26 

December 

3 

50 

7    15 

Jnno 

6 

58 

19       2 

9 

52 

6     61 

12 

11 

59 

18    39 

15 

55 

6    28 

18 

12 

1 

18     15 

21 

11     58 

6      4 

24 

2 

17     63 

27 

12       1 

6    40 

30 

3 

17    28 

X. 


TABLE    F  i  Showing  the   tifnealal  which  the  several  etare  eulmiiiate 
after  the  culmi'MLtion  of  Hie  Vernal  Equinox, 


StarSk 


Aswiai 

3harani 

Krittika 

Roliiui 

Agni 

Mrigasirsba 

Ardra 

Frajapati 

Agastya 

Mi'igav  yasa 

Panarvasa 

Pushya 

Aslesba 

Magha 

Pulaba 

Krutn 

P.  Phalguni 

U.  Phalgaui 

Pnlastya 

Atri 

Hasta 


Crimes. 

h. 

m. 

1 

48 

2 

86 

a 

40 

4, 

28 

5 

18 

6 

27 

6 

48 

6 

49 

6 

20 

6 

89 

7 

87 

8 

86 

d 

39 

10 

0 

10 

63 

10 

55 

11 

6 

11 

41 

11 

46 

12 

7 

12 

26 

Stars. 


T 


Augirai  .«. 

Apat 

Apiimvat 

Okiilra 

Vaisislitta 

Mariobi 

Swati 

Visakba 

Aimradba 

Jyesbta 

Moola 

P.  Asbadba 

A  bbijib 

U«  Asbadba     ... 

Sravana 

Sravisbta 

Sataya  ... 

P.  Bbodradada... 

U  Bbadrapada... 

Revati 

Dbruva  (Polo  Star) 


Times. 


h. 

12 
12 
18 
18 
18 
18 
14 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
18 
18 
19 
20 
22 
22 
0 
1 
1 


m. 

47 
48 

2 
17 
17 
41 

8 
42 
56 
20 
20 
10 
80 
85 
42 
81 
43 
65 

2 

7 
10 


Note :  As  tbe  Vernal  Equinox  ia 
60  soconds  a  year,  tables  E.  and  F. 
Almauao  for  tbe  year. 


sabject  to  a  retrograde  motion  of  oyer 
will  bave  to  be  prepared  from  tbe 


>  V 


This  preservation  photocopy 

was  made  and  hand  bound  at  BookLab,  Inc. 

in  compliance  with  copyright  law.  The  paper, 

Weyerhaeuser  Ck>ugar  Opaque  Natural, 

meets  the  requirements  of  ANSI/NISO 

Z39.48-1992  (Permanence  of  Paper). 


Austin  1994 


lbs  borrower  must  return  this  item  on  or  befne 
the  last  date  stamped  below.  If  another  user 
places  a  recall  for  this  item,  the  borrower  will 
be  notified  of  the  need  for  an  earlier  return. 

Non-receipt  of  overdue  notices  does  not  exempt 
the  borrower  from  overdue  fines. 


Harvard  College  Wideoer  Library 
Cambridge,  MA  02138        617-495-2413 


Please  handle  with  care. 

Thank  you  for  helping  to  preserve 
libraiy  collections  at  Harvard. 


